                    Notes from the GreyCampus\Udemy Course
                    Lean Six Sigma Green Belt


                    Section 1 Define
1 - The Basics of Six Sigma(First Part)
Six Sigma Definition - A business improvement approach that seeks to find and then eliminate causes of both mistakes
and defects in business processes by focusing on those outputs that are of critical importance to a customer.
Normal distributed processes - over 99% fall within +\- 3.0 sigma where Sigma is a statistical term that, refers to the 
standard deviation of a process about it’s mean.
Motorola developed six sigma as a key business initiative in 1987 as a result of Bill Smith’s yield theory. 
Motorola noted that many operations, such as complex assemblies, tended to shift 1.5 sigma over time. This means that  a
process, with a normal distribution and normal variation of the mean, would need to have specification limits of
+\-6 sigma in order to produce less than 3.4 defects per million opportunities. This failure rate can be referred to as
defects per opportunity (DPO), or defects per million opportunities (DPMO).
To reach the 6 sigma level, a process would have only 3.4 Defects per Million Opportunities. This illustrates the very
core principle of Six Sigma which is to is to deliver near perfect products and services by improving the process
and eliminating defects

Most oganisations use the acronym DMAIC to illustrate the steps in the process
- Define: Select the appropriate responses (the “Ys”) to be improved.
- Measure: Data must be gathered to measure the response variable.
- Analyze: Identify the root causes of defects or significant measurement deviations whether in or out of specifications.
- Improve: Reduce variability or eliminate the cause.
- Control: With the desired improvements in place, monitor the process to sustain improvements
The above are applied to all projects

Dr Mikel Harry takes these steps a bit further with 8 steps with his RDMAICSI approach
- R Recognize the true states of your business.
- D Define what plans must be in place to realize improvement of each state.
- M Measure the business systems that support the plans.
- A Analyze the gaps in system performance benchmarks.
- l Improve system elements to achieve performance goals.
- C Control system-level characteristics those are critical to value.
- S Standardize the systems that prove to be best-in-class.
- l Integrate best-in-class systems into the strategic planning framework.

Six Sigma utilises a number of different tools such as lean manufacturing, DOE (design of experiments), and DFSS (design 
for six sigma) and even uses some TQM(Total Quality Management).
Business can enjoy great success from using Six Sigma including -
- Cost reductions: Reduction of cost is critical for running a company successfully.
- Productivity improvements: Productivity improvement implies maximizing performance of resources.
- Customer relations improvements: If customers are unhappy the organisation has problems.
- Defect reductions: Defects result in reworking and each reworked transaction is an additional cost.
- Product and service improvements: Products\Services need to change with time to reflect any changes in the world. 
- Cycle-Time reductions: Processing time from order to cash must be minimised so cycle-time reduction is a critical aspect.

Understand the reasons why Six Sigma works is important so here are some reasons
- Bottom line results
- Senior management is involved
- A disciplined approach is used (DMAIC\RDMAICSI)
- Short project completion times (3 to 6 months)
- Clearly defined measures of success
- Infrastructure of trained individuals (black belts, green belts)
- Customers and processes are the focus
- A sound statistical approach is used
Some organisations have found that they can even go beyond Six Sigma often this occurs because defects become rare and
are given proper attention thus improving the process even further.

2 - The Basics of Six Sigma(Second Part)
Six Sigma has gone through several evolutionary cycles to arrive where it is at now
 - 1979 – 1986: Period of Evolution: Six Sigma goes through several versions from RDMAICSI to DMAIC. 
 - 1986 – 1992: Period of Design: When Six Sigma was picked up by other organizations they designed the Six Sigma 
  methodology to suit different industries (other than manufacturing).
 - 1993 – 1994: Period of Refinement: Six Sigma went through another phase of refinement and steps such as Design of 
  Experiments(DOE) were taken to advanced levels.
 - 1994 – 1996: Period of Results: Most manufacturing organizations started gaining the results and reflecting
  them in financial statements.
 - 1996 – 1997: Period of Awareness: In this period, the world started to know the power of Six Sigma. It was no
  longer a methodology known to a few organizations.
 - 1997 – 1998: Period of Adaptation: Organizations learnt Six Sigma techniques and implemented it in their day-
  to-day processes. Eventually, they started gaining benefits.
 - 1999 – till date: Period of Enlightenment: Six Sigma has now become the basic hygiene requirement of most
  of the organizations. Individuals with Six Sigma expertise are given preference over other individuals.
  
  Six Sigma initiatives begin with understanding one basic idea -
  The Problem Solving Strategy should always Focus on the Causes and NOT on the Effect.
  Six sigma quality is built around the customer. Everything starts and ends with customers. They define quality and set 
  the expectations. They rightfully expect performance, reliability, competitive prices, on-time delivery, service, and 
  clear and accurate transaction processing. At times, the customer of the project may not be as evident as initially 
  thought. Depending on the organisation the receiver of the next operation, an internal department, could be thought of 
  as a customer. The external customer of a process could be the purchaser.
  
  Embarking on a Lean Six Sigma initiative begins with a management decision to embrace a change that will lead to a better
  organisation. The readiness assessment that should be completed includes a review of the following areas:
    Assess the outlook and future path of the business:
      Is the company's strategy clear?
      Can we meet the organisational financial and growth goals?
      Does the organization respond effectively to new circumstances?
    Evaluate the current organizational performance:
      What are our current overall business results?
      How effectively do we meet customer requirements?
      How effectively are we operating?
    Review the capacity for system’s change and improvement:
      How effective are we in managing system changes?
      How well are our cross functional processes managed?
      Are our current efforts in conflict with six sigma?
  Going through the above assessment will go a long way towards deciding if current efforts are sufficient or whether the 
  timing is appropriate to undertake a six sigma implementation programme. Lean six sigma can be applied as a targeted 
  approach. A number of so-called lean six sigma companies have improvement techniques and teams in place and only assign 
  black belt assistance as needed.
  

3 - The Basics of Six Sigma(Third Part)
  The primary customer of the process will or should have the highest impact on the process as they are of upmost 
  importance, this fact may need some discussing within the organisation as the primary customer may not be always
  immediately clear
  
  There are many differnt methods to collect information and data from customers or would-be customers:
    1. Surveys
    2. Focus groups
    3. Interviews
    4. Complaint systems
    5. Market research
    6. Shopper programs
  Augmenting the more traditional methods of obtaining customer information an organisation could also utilise:
    1. Targeted and multi-level surveys
    2. Targeted and multi-level interviews
    3. Customer scorecards
    4. Data warehousing
    5. Data mining
    6. Customer audits
    7. Supplier audits
    8. Quality function deployment
  This information should allow an organization to identify their customer's requirements and to spot upcoming trends. 
  By utilising trends when many companies do not will give an advantage to a company trying to gain or retain customers. 
  Customers also from survey findings seem to be more satisfied if they receive feedback than if there is none.
  The voice of the customer is critical to business success. Likewise Six Sigma practitioners must properly consider 
  how customers (both internal and external) can be identified, and what their requirements might be in order to understand 
  and improve the business process. The relationship with either customer type will affect the company's ability to be 
  effective in properly delivering true customer satisfaction.
  
4 - The Fundamentals of Six Sigma(First Part)
Defining a process - Process definitions are available everywhere but this one works as well as any -
  Processes are definable portions of a system or subsystem that consist of a number of individual elements, actions, 
  or steps.
Common business functional processes include the following - 
  Human Resources
  Engineering
  Finance
  Sales and Marketing
  Quality

Six Sigma projects can be aimed at any critical to x processes in the business, these include
Critical to Quality (CTQ) Projects may include -
  Simplifying product designs
  Aligning product designs with customer requirements
  Meeting and Exceeding current marketplace quality levels
  Meeting technical and Exceeding requirements

Cost of Quality (COQ) - 
  Reducing internal and external rejections
  Reducing product and process variations
  Reducing and Eliminating various forms of waste

Critical to Delivery (CTD) - Projects may include -
  Providing service within a specific time interval and ensuring prompt responses to customer questions
  Providing cost-effective delivery methods combined with more rapid field service
  Meeting customer packaging requirements and minimise shipping damage

Critical to Price (CTP) - 

Critical to Safety (CTS) - Projects may include -
Using warning alarms in conjunction with providing safety cut-off devices
Providing continuing adequate employee training and also clear written instructions
Protecting both operators and equipment from damage
Providing back-up redundancies for critical processes
Conducting safety reviews
Providing protective devices when applicable


The costs of poor quality (COPQ) are those costs associated with providing poor quality products or services.
4 Cost categories -
  Internal failure costs (costs associated with defects found before the customer receives the product or service)
  External failure costs (costs associated with defects found after the customer receives the product or service)
  Appraisal costs (costs incurred to determine the degree of conformance to quality requirements)
  Prevention costs (costs incurred to keep failure and appraisal costs to a minimum)


5 - The Fundamentals of Six Sigma(Second Part)

6 - Selecting Lean Six Sigma Project

7 - Lean Enterprise(First Part)

8 - Lean Enterprise(Second Part)

9 - Lean Enterprise(Third Part)

11 - Lean Enterprise(Fourth Part)

11 - Lean Enterprise(Fifth Part)



                    Section 2 Measure
1 - Process Definition(First Part)

2 - Process Definition(Second Part)

3 - Process Definition(Third Part)

4 - Six Sigma Statistics

5 - Measurement System Analysis

6 - Process Capability(First Part)

7 - Process Capability(Second Part)

8 - Process Capability(Third Part)

9 - Process Capability(Fourth Part)



                    Section 3 Analyze
1 - Pattern of Variation

2 - Inferential Statistics

3 - Hypothesis Testing

4 - Hypothesis Testing with Normal Data



                    Section 4 Improve
1 - Simple Linear Regression

2 - Multiple Regression Analysis



                    Section 5 Control
1 - Lean Controls

2 - Statistical Process Control

3 - Six Sigma Control Plans



                    Section 6 Downlodable Offline Course Material
The instructor has provided a set of PDF documents for each of the lectures in the course that can be downloaded
and read at the students discretion.




                    Section 7 Toolkit
1 - Toolkits
The instructor has provided a set of templates for Lean Practitioners to use within their projects.

 
                    Section 8 Course Conclusion
The course conclude with some messages from the course instructors such as discounts etc for anyone wishing to take
another course with them.
