February 24th, 2017 - 3 Tactics for Hyperlocal Keywords
The problem:
Most keyword research tools, and this includes things like the Google AdWords Tool etc are relying on volume data. 
So what happens is when you see a bunch of keyword suggestions, you type in "Sequim," for example, Sequim is a tiny town on
Washington's peninsula, so across the Puget Sound from where we are here in Seattle. Sequim has a population of like 6,500 people or 
something like that, so very tiny. So most searches related to Sequim have no volume data in any of these tools. As a result, you 
don't see a lot of information about: How can I target these keywords? What are the right ones to go after? You don't know whether a 
keyword has zero searches a month, or whether it has four searches a month, and those four searchers are exactly who you want to get 
in front of, and this is really problematic.

There are three solutions that we've seen professional SEOs use and that some of us here at Moz use and the Moz Local team uses, and 
these can be real handy for you.

Solution 1: Use keyword data for larger, similar regions
So the first one is to basically replicate the data by using keyword information that comes from similar regions nearby. So let's say, 
okay, here we are in Sequim, Washington, population 6,669. But Port Angeles is only a few miles away. I think maybe a couple dozen
miles away. But its population is more like 20,000. So we've got four or five times the keyword volume for most searches probably. 
This is going to include some outlying areas. So now we can start to get data. Not everything is going to be zero searches per month, 
and we can probably backtrack that to figure out what Sequim's data is going to be like. The same thing goes for Ruidoso versus Santa Fe.
Ruidoso, almost 8,000. But Santa Fe's population is almost 10 times larger at 70,000. Or Stowe, Vermont, 4,300, tiny, little town. 
Burlington is nearby, 10 times bigger at 42,000. Great. So now I can take these numbers and I can intuit what the relative volumes are,
because the people of Burlington are probably similar in their search patterns to the people of Stowe. There are going to be a few 
differences, but for most types of local searches this will work.

Solution 2: Let Google autosuggest help
The second one, Google autosuggest can be really helpful here. So Google Suggest does not care if there's one search a month or one 
search in the last year, versus zero searched in the last year. They'll still show you something. Well, zero searched in the last year, 
they won't show you anything.
But for example, when I search for "Sequim day," I can intuit here, because of the ordering that Google Suggest shows me, that 
"Sequim day spa" is more popular than "day care." Sequim, by the way, sounds like a lovely place to live if you are someone who enjoys
few children and lots of spa time, apparently. Then, "day hikes."
So this technique doesn't just work with Google itself. It'll also work with Bing, with Google Maps, and with YouTube. Another 
suggestion on this one, you will see different results if you use a mobile device versus a desktop device. So you might want to change
it up and try your mobile device. 

Solution 3: Use lexical or related SERP suggestions
All right. Third tactic here, last one, you can use sort of two styles of keyword research. One is called lexical, which is basically 
the semantic relationships between words and phrases. The other one is related SERP suggestions, which is where a keyword research 
tool — Moz Keyword Explorer does this, SEMrush is very popular for this, and there are a few others — and they will basically show you 
search terms the links that came up, the search results that came up for "Sequim day care" also came up in searches for these terms and 
phrases. So these are like SERPs for which your SERP also ranked.
You can see, when I searched for "Sequim day care," I did this in Keyword Explorer, because I happen to have a Moz Keyword Explorer 
subscription. It's very nice of Moz to give me that. You can see that I used two kinds of suggestions. One are related to keywords with
similar results, so that's the related SERPs. The other one was based on closely related topics, like the semantic, lexical thing. 
"Sequim day care" has given me great stuff like "Banbury School Nursery," a nearby town, "secondary schools in Banbury," 
"Horton Day Nursery," which is a nursery that's actually near there, "Port Angeles childcare," "children's nursery."
So now I'm getting a bunch of keyword suggestions that can potentially be relevant and lead me down a path. When I look at closely
related topics, I can see things like closely related topics. By the way, what I did is I actually removed the term "Sequim," because 
that was showing me a lot of things that are particular to that region. But if I search for "day care," I can see lots of closely 
related topics, like day care center, childcare, school care, special needs children, preschool programs, and afterschool programs. 
So now I can take all of these and apply the name of the town and get these hyperlocal results.

This is frustrating still. You don't have nearly the data that you have for much more popular search terms. But this is a good way to 
start building that keyword list, targeting, experimenting, and testing out the on-page work that you're going to need to do to rank 
for these terms. Then, you'll start to see your traffic grow from these.
Hyperlocal may be small, but it can be powerful, it can be very targeted, and it can bring you exactly the customers you're looking for.




February 17th, 2017 - How to Prioritize Your Link Building Efforts & Opportunities
This comes as a big challenge for many marketers and SEOs because link building can just seem so daunting. So it's tough to know how to 
get started, and then it's tough to know once you've gotten into the practice of link building, how do you build up a consistent, 
useful system to do it? That's what I want to walk you through today.

Step 1: Tie your goals to the link's potential value
So first off, step one. What I'm going to ask you to do is tie your SEO goals to the reasons that you're building links. So you have 
some reason that you want links. It is almost certainly to accomplish one of these five things. There might be other things on the list 
too, but it's almost always one of these areas.

A) Rank higher for keyword X. You're trying to get links that point to a particular page on your site, that contain a particular anchor text, so that you can rank better for that. Makes total sense. There we go.
B) You want to grow the ranking authority of a particular domain, your website, or maybe a subdomain on your website, or a subfolder of that website. Google does sort of have some separate considerations for different folders and subdomains. So you might be trying to earn links to those different sections to help grow those. Pretty similar to (A), but not necessarily as much of a need to get the direct link to the exact URL.
C) Sending real high-value traffic from the ranking page. So maybe it's the case that this link you're going after is no followed or it doesn't pass ranking influence, for some reason — it's JavaScript or it's an advertising link or whatever it is — but it does pass real visitors who may buy from you, or amplify you, or be helpful to achieving your other business goals.
D) Growing topical authority. So this is essentially saying, "Hey, around this subject area or keyword area, I know that my website needs some more authority. I'm not very influential in this space yet, at least not from Google's perspective. If I can get some of these links, I can help to prove to Google and, potentially, to some of these visitors, as well, that I have some subject matter authority in this space."
E) I want to get some visibility to an amplification-likely or a high-value audience. So this would be things like a lot of social media sites, a lot of submission type sites, places like a Product Hunt or a Reddit, where you're trying to get in front of an audience, that then might come to your site and be likely to amplify it if they love what they see.
Okay. So these are our goals.

Step 2: Estimate the likelihood that the link target will influence that goal
Second, I'm going to ask you to estimate the likelihood that the link target will pass value to the page or to the section of your site.
This relies on a bunch of different judgments.
You can choose whether you want to wrap these all up in sort of a single number that you estimate, maybe like a 0 to 10, where 0 is not
at all valuable, and 10 is super, super valuable. Or you could even take a bunch of these metrics and actually use them directly, so 
things like domain authority, or linking root domains to the URL, or page authority, the content relevance.

You could be asking:
 - Is this a nofollowed or a followed link?
 - Is it passing the anchor text that I'm looking for or anchor text that I control or influence at all?
 - Is it going to send me direct traffic?
 - If the answers to these are all positive, that's going to bump that up, and you might say, "Wow, this is high authority. It's 
   passing great anchor text. It's sending me good traffic. It's a followed link. The relevance is high. I'm going to give this a 10."

Or that might not be the case. This might be low authority. Maybe it is followed, but the relevance is not quite there. You don't control the anchor text, and so anchor text is just the name of your brand, or it just says "site" or something like that. It's not going to send much traffic. Maybe that's more like a three.

Then you're going to ask a couple of questions about the page that they're linking to or your website.

Is that the right page on your site? If so, that's going to bump up this number. If it's not, it might bring it down a little bit.
Does it have high relevance? If not, you may need to make some modifications or change the link path.
Is there any link risk around this? So if this is a — let's put it delicately — potentially valuable, but also potentially risky page,
you might want to reduce the value in there.
I'll leave it up to you to determine how much link risk you're willing to take in your link building profile. Personally, I'm willing to accept none at all.

Step 3: Build a prioritization spreadsheet
Then step three, you build a prioritization spreadsheet that looks something like this. So you have which goal or goals are being 
accomplished by acquiring this link. You have the target and the page on your site. You've got your chance of earning that link. 
That's going to be something you estimate, and over time you'll get better and better at this estimation. Same with the value. 
We talked about using a number out of 10 over here. You can do that in this column, or you could just take a bunch of these metrics and 
shove them all into the spreadsheet if you prefer.
Then you have the tactic you're going to pursue. So this is direct outreach, this one's submit and hope that it does well, and who it's 
assigned to. Maybe it's only you because you're the only link builder, or maybe you have a number of people in your organization, or PR 
people who are going to do outreach, or someone, a founder or an executive who has a connection to some of these folks, and they're 
going to do the outreach, whatever the case.
Then you can start to prioritize. You can build that prioritization by doing one of a couple things. You could take some amalgamation 
of these numbers, so like a high chance of earning and a high estimated value. We'll do some simple multiplication, and we'll make that
our prioritization. Or you might give different goals. Like you might say, "Hey, you know what? (A) is worth a lot more to me right now
than (C). So, therefore, I'm going to rank the ones that are the (A) goal much higher up." That is a fine way to go about this as well.
Then you can sort your spreadsheet in this fashion and go down the list. Start at the top, work your way down, and start checking off 
links as you get them or don't get them. That's a pretty high percentage, I'm doing real well here. But you get the idea.
This turns link building from this sort of questionable, frustrating, what should I do next, am I following the right path, into a 
simple process that not only can you follow, but you can train other people to follow. This is really important, because link building 
is an essential part of SEO, still a very valuable part of SEO, but it's also a slog. So, to the degree that you can leverage other 
help in your organization, hire an intern and help train them up, work with your PR teams and have them understand it, have multiple
people in the organization all sharing this spreadsheet, all understanding what needs to be done next, that is a huge help.



February 10th, 2017 - The Keyword + Year Content/Rankings Hack
The keyword-plus-year hack is the idea that you take a keyword that has some existing search volume, and you add on a date, either a 
month or a month and a year, and you are able to outrank many of the other players because it's a much less competitive space.
So let's say there are a good number of people every year who search for the best web designs. They want to get design inspiration, or 
they just want to see what's out there. They're looking for the design gallery, so they search for best web designs. Many times, though,
those folks will get results from the last 5 to 10 years, and they'll see those in there and they'll go, "You know, I want something 
more modern, more updated," and so they will revise their query to "best web designs 2016." In fact, many people even start with these 
queries. So they want to see the top Android games of January 2017. They want to see the best summer dishes 2017 for planning on 
cooking something. 
They're looking for something that is trendy. Maybe they're looking around fashion, or you see this a lot in searches around hairstyle 
or anything that is grading products or services. Who are the best real estate agents in Seattle? No, no, not the 2012 edition of 
"Seattle Met Magazine." I want 2017. Who are the best real estate agents in Seattle 2017? So they'll add this year on there. 
What's great is, because this year or month only happens as it happens, those searches only happen as we get to that time period, 
the keyword research will not expose it to you. So if, for example, let's make this 2017, so "best web designs 2017."
There have only just started to be a few any keyword searches that include the word 2017, because 2017 has just started. Therefore, 
your competitors are not seeing those in their keyword research list. They're not targeting them. There's not a ton of content out 
there yet, and so it's easier. Even though the volume tends to be lower than the usual keyword — sometimes it's higher, but usually 
lower — you will find it is vastly easier to rank for, and it's also the case — this is sort of beautiful — if you're using this tactic,
even though it's higher in volume to have "best web designs" versus "best web designs 2017," the one without the year, it is often the 
case that Google will bias to show more recent content, especially if there are lots of searches that get revised to include the 
temporal number or date.
That is awesome because it means that you can win twice. You can rank for this one, which, of course, the search volume for it will die 
off at the end of the year, but you might be able to rank for this one as well. If you keep that updated, and change it up, and add to it, retire the old one, move the old one over to an old URL, put the new one up at the new URL, or keep the same URL if you're trying to build on top of the link authority that you've built to that URL, you can have some awesome ranking and traffic power.

The process - How do you do this?
1. Conduct keyword research using:
NON-date keywords – You want to conduct the keyword research without using the date. I'm going to start with non-date keywords. So if I'm in Keyword Explorer, or if I'm doing my keyword research in AdWords, or wherever I am, I would search for "best web design," get a big list of my target keywords.
Last year + keywords – Then I would go look at last year numbers. For example, I would search for "2016 best web design" or "best web design 2016" or anything from my keyword export or list that includes years.
2–3 years ago + keywords – I would go two and three years ago, so that I could get a sense for the volume that includes the year. I would also be looking for month at this time.

2. Use Google Trends and/or SimilarWeb/Jumpshot Trends to ID seasonality
Then I'd use Google Trends, or if you're not a fan of Google Trends — they can be a little squirrely with some data — SimilarWeb and 
Jumpshot also have keyword trend data, at least at the head of the demand curve, that can be good, and try and identify some of that
seasonality. If you see that there's a high season that includes a particular month, that's often an indication that month plus year 
could be there, and then you can go and look in here. I could add "May 2016 best web design" to see if there was actually search volume 
for just the May keyword.

3. Use Google SERPs to determine if the month/year tactic is popular or underserved in your niche
Then I'm going to use Google SERPs. I'm going to check the keyword difficulty of those SERPs, and I'd probably look to see how many 
different outlets are producing monthly or annual content. For annual content, it's really going to be very January- and 
February-centric. That's when it all gets produced. Then, if it is underserved, that means there's more opportunity there, but, even 
still, it's almost always a lower difficulty, easier to get in there.

4. Target and create that timely content
So, to do that, you're going to be using:
Recent data. If I were creating a page to target "best web design 2017," I would want to use designs that have come out in the last
month only or maybe just at the very end of 2016.
Employ emerging trends and language. So maybe it's PWAs, maybe it is language around clean design, whatever the trends in the field are 
right now.
Serve the recency of the searcher's intent by giving them the ability or showing right up front that my data and my information is very 
recent and that I'm helping them with what's going now, not just historically.

5. Publish as early in the period as possible
You want to publish this content as early as you can in the period without doing it earlier. So what I don't want to do is have my 
launch be in December 2016. December is a very quiet period anyway. It's tough to get traction and attention, it's tough to build 
links, but it also can be the case that you won't hit the search algorithms as recency systems. Google has these algorithms called the 
QDF, query deserves freshness, and so if they see that you're producing that content a month or two months before it's actually the
right date, there's going to be skepticism, both from users who might stumble upon it or find it, but also from engines. 




February 3rd, 2017 - Refurbishing Top Content
Any of you watching likely have top content, either on your site or a client's site, that does really, really well. Whether that's 
getting the most traffic or converting the most users, it does really well. The problem is that we let it just sit there, and we're not
getting the amplification that we could out of that content. 

1 - Identify your site's top traffic pages.
Analytics is great for this and to further evaluate which of those pages are converting the highest, have the most engagements, and is
bringing in most of your traffic. It's super important to keep in mind that there are other forms of content. It's not always necessarily
just a page on your website. It could be a video somewhere, it could be a really great podcast, it could even be a printout, and I've run 
into this a few times where the information isn't currently digital, but they use it in a clinic or in an office setting that could do 
really great things for the website.

2 - Simplify and repurpose
For the sake of our example, I'm going with a long-form content of how to choose the right college. Maybe this brings in lots of 
applicants for a particular school or university. So what could they better be doing with this piece of content? So that brings us to 
step two, which is simplify and repurpose. We all want to consume information differently. There are different use cases, you name it.
So to take a long-form piece of content and to put it together in a PowerPoint, really simplify it and break it up into slides. 
From there, you can use those slides or take new raw footage to make a really, really powerful video on how to choose the right college.
If you have these two steps done, you're kind of set up for success for images. You could either take images from your PowerPoint or your video and have really great informational text below it.

Lastly, audio, how easy would it be to take this long-form piece and to make it into an audio option or a podcast even, allowing your visitors maybe another option when they get to this page? So it's fun to experiment with that as well.
You can interweave some of these other forms of content back into the original piece, and now you're learning a lot more about your audience and a lot more about how they want to consume your content.

Step 3: Publish on popular platforms
I can already feel people getting really squeamish about this, but you shouldn't. Let me say there are two big reasons why you should be taking advantage of this. One, these are all really, really powerful sites. They rank really well. Two, they have a huge audience, and their audiences are actively seeking information that you're providing on your site. So if you're not going to be providing expertise and information on these sites, someone will, right? So you want to take advantage of that, and you want to take the opportunity.

So you could take your PowerPoint and upload it to SlideShare. SlideShare ranks so, so well. You could take your video and upload it to YouTube, with the caveat of putting it on Vimeo or Wistia first. You want to make sure that you are self-hosting for up to three months, and then you can transfer your video to YouTube. That way you're getting the authority of that video, and Youtube.com isn't ranking first for it.

Instagram is great for those images, but, again, I would always put the text below it and keep your images really clean and not have too much text on them, and then to obviously hashtag appropriately.

Then Pinterest, Quora, people are actively asking questions that you have all the answers to, so to be the expertise in the field and to take advantage of people asking, "How do I choose the right college?" Reddit and LinkedIn are other options to further amplify.

Step 4: Measure the referral metrics
Measure the impact of republishing on these sites. There are a couple of ways to do this. These are some of my favorite engagement metrics. So you have number of viewed pages, you have time on site, bounce rate is always good to look at, and, obviously, conversions. So this really starts to paint a picture of: Where are you seeing the qualified leads? Where is your qualified traffic coming from?

Then the next time you go to a new content strategy, maybe you leave out these three because you didn't get much traffic from them, but maybe you saw a bunch of qualified leads from SlideShare. So that brings you to pivot, like the "Friends" episode. It allows you to pivot.

So now, we have a strategy moving forward. We know what platforms work best for your website or your business, and you're kind of setting yourself up for success down the road.
