                    Whiteboard Friday 2017 Moz.com January 2017
Friday January 27th, 2017 - How to Choose a Good SEO Company for Your Business or Website 
In choosing a reputable company to manage your SEO, there's both a right way and a wrong way to go about the hiring process. 
This is a critical hire, if SEO is important to your business, then the choice of which company or person to use is going to have a huge
impact, probably one of the biggest impacts on whether you get great results. There are a bunch of mistakes that people make when they 
go down this selecting an SEO company path.
Don't make these mistakes - 
Mistake 1 - Using Google as your filter
Simplistic thinking is a good SEO company will do a great job ranking for SEO company or SEO consultant or SEO consultant plus my city 
name. Unfortunately, what happens is most of the very good companies, the ones that are in high demand, the ones that do consistently
great work and get great referrals, they don't actually need to rank here. They're overwhelmed with clients all the time because their 
clients refer them to people and lots of they're making plenty of money and incredibly busy, so they don't spend any work optimizing 
their own website to get new clients. Many of the companies that rank well for best SEO plus city name or best SEO plus a region or 
plus a particular specialty, like best ecommerce SEO, are not. They are, in fact, simply without any client work and so they're 
concentrating all their energy on trying to get new clients. 

Mistake 2 - Trusting "Top SEO" lists
Many people will search for "best SEOs" or "best SEO consultants" or "best SEO companies," "best SEO companies United States." They'll 
get to a website eg bestSEOs.com or topSEOs.com. Their business model is they try and rank for terms like this, and then they sell
those listings, the listings on their page, to SEO firms and companies. That is a great model for them. But that pay-to-play scheme is 
not trustworthy for you as a consumer of SEO companies. Don't trust those types of lists. There are a few lists, there are a few 
websites, places like getcredo.com run and Moz's recommended SEO list, which is just personal recommendations and the recommendations
of my network. You can't pay to be on there. You can't pay to be listed. Some of those are more trustworthy. 

Mistake 3 - Believing there's a "secret sauce"
Believing the sales pitch that unfortunately many I'm going to say low-quality SEO consultants use, which is there's a secret sauce. 
There are no secret sauces in SEO. No one has a secret proprietary process. SEO is a very, very open field. It's well understood. It has
origins in a lot of secrecy, but that is not the way it is today and you should never accept that as an answer. That is a red flag.

The recommended process for choosing an SEO company:
Step 1 - 
Sit down with your team, whoever you've got, and figure out the goals you're trying to achieve with SEO. Why do you want to do SEO? Why 
do you want to rank organically for keywords? Then, figure out how you're going to judge success versus failure. In this process, 
there are good goals and bad goals.
Good goals - 
I want to get in front of a lot of people who are researching this, and so we need traffic from these specific groups. I know that they
perform searches for this.
We're trying to boost revenue, and we're trying to boost it through new sales and SEO is a sales driving channel.
We're trying to boost downloads or free sign-ups or free trials. 
We're trying to boost sentiment for our brand. Maybe if you Googled some of our branded terms today, there are some poor reviews,
there's lots of good reviews that rank below them, and we want to push the good reviews up and the bad reviews down. Fine. Sentiment, 
that could be something you're driving as well. You know a lot of people are researching your brand or branded terms. 
Bad goals -
We just want traffic, more traffic. Why? Traffic is not a goal in and of itself. If you say, "Well, we want more traffic because we 
know search traffic converts well for us and here are the statistics on it," fine, terrific. Now it's a revenue driving thing.
Rankings alone,this is a vanity thing that many people have where they want to rank for something simply because they want to rank for 
it. Usually a bad sign for SEO companies considering clients. 
Beating a particular competitor out for specific keywords or phrases. Again, not a great goal. Doesn't drive directly to revenue.
Doesn't drive directly to organizational goals.
Vanity metrics. I still see people who are saying, "Hey, does anyone know a great SEO company that can help bring our domain authority
up or our Majestic trust flow up or, worst of all, our Google PageRank up?" Google dropped PageRank years ago. 

Step 2 - 
Once you have a list of these good goals that you're trying to optimize for, assemble a list of usually three to five. You can do more 
if you have the bandwidth to evaluate more, but three to five, at least, consultants or agencies. Those could be by a bunch of criteria.
You might say, "Hey, look we really need someone in our region so that we can meet with them in person or at least someone who can fly 
to us on a regular basis." You might say something like, "Our price range or our budget is this particular thing." You want to find 
whatever those criteria are and make sure you've got a list of three to five folks that you can consider against one another. Have some 
conversations with them and dig into references.
Good sources - 
Your friends and personal networks and professional networks as well.
Similar non-competitive companies. You will find that if you're, for example, in a B2B space or in an ecommerce space and there's a 
non-competitive ecommerce company whom you're friendly with, you can build those relationships. You should certainly already have those
relationships. Talking to those folks about who they use and whether they were successful, great way to find some good people.
Industry insiders, reach out to some of those influential insiders with whom you have a relationship or whose opinion you really like 
and care about and ask them who they would recommend.
Good questions to ask - 
By the way, I like asking SEO companies: What process are you going to use to accomplish our goals, and why do you use those particular 
processes? That's a really smart one to start with.
Ask them about their communication and reporting process. How often? What's their cadence like? What metrics do they report on? What do
they need you to collect? Why do they collect those metrics? How do those match up to your goals and how do they align?
What work and resources will you have to commit internally? You should know that before you go into any arrangement, because it could 
get very complex. If your SEO company says, "Great here's a list of recommendations," and you say, "Fine, we don't have the development
bandwidth, or we don't have the content creation bandwidth, or we don't have the visual or UI or UX exchange bandwidth to make any of 
those. So what do we do?" Well, now you're road blocked. You should've had that conversation much earlier in time. *By the way, SEO 
usually requires some intensive resource allotment. So you should plan for that ahead of time.
What do you do when things aren't working? I love asking that question, and I like asking for specific examples of when things haven't 
gone right and what they've done to fix that in the past and work around it.
I like asking broadly. Especially when you open a conversation, especially if you're feeling like, hey I want to get to know this 
company's approach to SEO and their understanding of Google, you can ask them something like, "Hey, tell me how does Google rank 
results, and how do you as a company influence them?" You should hear good answers about, yes, this is how Google does things, and 
here's how we know that and here's how we do our process of influencing those results. That's great.

Step 3 - 
Recommended that you choose on these four things:
Trust -  That's through references, through the conversation, through people that you've talked to in your network.
Through referrals -  If you hear great referrals and you trust those referral sources, that's a wonderful signal.
Communication Style -  If your communication style, even if everything else is good, but when you have conversations, 
you walk away from them feeling a little frustrated, maybe you should look for another provider.
Price and contract structure - Many SEO firms have a contract structure that's month-to-month and that has a certain length of time. 
You should expect to pay some upfront payment and then some ongoing monthly fee. There's usually a time at which the payment will 
recur and the contract will renew. 

Pro tips - 
Three pro tips - 
If SEO needs to be a core competency at your company, bring it in-house. An agency or consultant can never do as much with as much 
resources, with as much communication, as someone in-house can do. 
If the quality SEO people that you're considering are too pricy, a suggestion might be to say, "Okay, how about you just advise us on 
the work, and we'll hire an in-house person, maybe who's more beginner-level and you coach that person?"
Remember that SEO is not for everyone. SEO is extremely competitive. Page 1 gets 95% plus of the clicks. The top 3 or 4 results are 
getting more than 70% of those clicks, 65% or 70%. So a lot of the time, if you can't afford yet to do SEO or to engage in it seriously,
it may not be all that valuable to go from ranking on page five for a lot of your key terms to page two or the bottom of page one. 



Friday January 20th 2017 - What Links Can You Get That Comply with Google's Guidelines
Today we're going to talk about natural links. I'm going to give you some tips about the types of links that you can get that comply 
with Google's guidelines. These links are sometimes much harder to get than unnatural links, but they're the type of link that Google 
expects to see and can really help improve your rankings.
1 - Ask
First is to ask people, if somebody is willing to vouch for your website, to link to your website, and you're not giving them anything 
as an incentive in return, then that actually is a good link.  You can say, "Hey, if you have a blog, could you mention that you work 
for us and link to us?" Now, if they have to hide the link somewhere to make it actually happen, then that may not be the best link. 
But if they legitimately are happy to mention you and link to your company, then that's a good natural link that Google will appreciate.

2 - Directories
Talking about directories that have a barrier to entry, a directory that you would expect that your business would be listed there, and 
a directory perhaps that people are actually using. A good place to get listed in these directories where you expect to see businesses 
is Moz Local. Moz Local can really help with the types of directories that you would expect to see your site listed in. There are 
sometimes also, though, niche directories that perhaps you have to do a little bit of searching for. That can be a really good link, 
and it's the type of link that would bring you traffic as well, which is another indicator of a good link. A good way to find these 
opportunities is to search for your competitors' phone number. You can do a search for the phone number minus their site, and that 
should give you a list of directories that Google actually thinks are good examples of links to your site. You can approach those 
directories and see if you can get a link to your site.

3 - Industry connections
Most businesses have connections with suppliers, with vendors, with clients, and with partners. These are places where you would expect
to see that your business is listed. If you can get listed on these types of lists, then that's a good thing. A good way to find these
is to find out what lists are your competitors on, take a look at their link profiles, and see if there's anything there where you 
should be listed as well.

4 - Unclaimed brand/name mentions
This is a place where somebody has mentioned your business, mentioned your website, perhaps mentioned your name, but they haven't linked 
to you. It's perfectly okay to reach out to those people and say, "Hey, thank you for mentioning us. Could you possibly link to us as 
well?" A lot of the time that can result in a link. You can find these opportunities by using Moz Fresh Web Explorer. Also, I think 
every business should have set up Google Alerts to tell you when somebody has mentioned your business. Even with these set up, sometimes
some things get missed, and so I recommend every month that you go and you do a search for your brand name and subtract out your 
website and also subtract out sites like YouTube or Facebook if you have a lot of those listings as well. 

5 - Reclaim broken links
A way that you can find broken links to your website is to go to Google Search Console and look at the crawl errors. What I'm talking 
about here is a place where somebody has linked to your website but perhaps they've misspelled the URL. What you can do, there are two 
ways that you can reclaim these. One is to reach out to the site and say, "Hey, thanks for linking to us. Could you maybe fix the typo?"
Number two is to create a redirect that goes from the misspelled URL to the properly spelled URL. When you do this, you lose a tiny 
little bit of link equity through the redirect, but still it's much better than having a link that goes to a broken page, because a 
link that goes to a 404 page is one that doesn't count for PageRank matters.

6 - Be awesome
Journalists are always looking for stuff to write about. If you can do something with your business that is newsworthy, then that's 
fantastic. Something you can do is create an event or perhaps do something for charity, and journalists love to write about that kind 
of thing. A good way to find opportunities to do things like this is to do a Google search for local and your profession. You can 
reach out to those journalists and say, "Hey, our business is doing this awesome thing. Would you consider writing a story about us?" 
Generally, that would include a link back to your website. 

7 - Get press? Get more!
If you're getting press, do things to get more of that press. I have a story about a client who had a product who went viral. 
What he ended up doing was contacting all of those people who had linked to him and offering himself as a source for an interview. 
We also contacted people who mentioned the product but didn't link to him and said, "Hey, could you possibly link to us? We'd be happy 
to do an interview. We'd be happy to provide a new angle to the story." So if you're doing something that is going viral, that is 
getting a lot of press, often that means that people are super interested in this aspect of your business, and you can usually, with a 
little bit of work, get more links out of that process.

8 - HARO
Which stands for Help A Reporter Out. HARO is an email list that connects journalists with businesses, with professionals as well. 
These journalists are looking for a source. A tip that I can offer is, if you're using Gmail, is to set up filters in Gmail so that you 
only see the HARO requests that contain your keyword or your business, otherwise, it can fill up your inbox. 

9 - What content is already getting links?
A good way to do this is to go to Google Search Console, Links to your site, Most linked content, and click on More. This is going to 
give you a list of the URLs on your site and the number of domains that are linking to those URLs. If you download the list, you'll also
be able to see the exact URLs where the links are coming from. If you have content on your site that actually is already attracting 
links, then this is the type of content that you want to promote to other people to get more links. You can also contact the people who 
did link to you and say, "Thank you so much for linking to me. Is there something else that we could produce that would be useful for 
your customers, for your readers?" Often that can give you good ideas for creating new content, and the links are right there if those 
people are willing to give you ideas to write about. 

10 - 10X Content
This is creating content that's 10 times better than anything that's out there on the web.It can just be a matter of answering the 
questions that people have about your product or your business. One tip is go to Yahoo Answers and search for my product or profession, 
and see what kind of questions people are asking about this because if people are asking the question on Yahoo Answers, it often means 
that the answer is not easily available on a Google search. You can create content that's the best of its kind, that answers any 
questions that people might have, and you can reach out and ask for links. If this is really, truly 10X content, it is the type of 
content that should attract links naturally as well.

So these are 10 ways that you can get links that will comply with Google's guidelines and really should make a difference in your 
rankings. These are going to be harder than just going to a free link directory or using some spammy techniques to make links.


                    
Friday January 13th 2017 - Comment Marketing: How to Earn Benefits from Community Participation
Comment marketing has not lost any of its power and influence. In fact, because fewer people are doing it today than were five or 
six years ago, especially in the digital marketing world, it's actually become increasingly influential. There's a limited number 
of blogs and communities in most sectors and spaces that have audiences that engage in the comments, but where they do, you find 
incredible levels of participation, of amplification, of opportunities for press and for links and for social following. 

How do comments help me/my site? - 
Why do comments help so much, and how do they help? Well, if you leave great comments on other sites, they may lead to visits to 
your website through your profile, through links that you leave, through people clicking on your profile and then following that link,
which can lead to links in future posts by the authors of the site where you commented or in future content pieces created by people 
who read that site.
If they see that your comment is particularly insightful, it brings up a great example, shows off a resource that is sorely lacking, 
especially when you are either leaving links or commenting about things, if you do so in a very respectful, diplomatic way. 
For example, one of the best strategies, best tactics I've seen for leaving a comment with a link in it is to say, "Hey, I want to make 
sure that this blog accepts links in the comments, but I figured I should point to X. Editor, feel free to remove if links are not 
appropriate." Or you could say something like, "We've actually been doing this on our site. If you go to our website, you can check out
the link via my profile." So you're not even leaving it in there. You're saying go check it out from there, then you can see this other
thing that I want to show off in relation to the content here, those can lead to great links to your site in the future.
Commenting can also lead to indirect links through exposure and exposure itself, meaning things like you leave consistent quality 
comments, people start to recognize you. You sort of see that profile picture again and you go, "I know that brand from somewhere or I 
know that person from somewhere. I have some positive association with them adding value." That can lead to a better chance of 
engagement with you, your personal brand, or your corporate brand in the future, which can mean a better chance of future conversion.
It can also lead to social following growth. So you have lots of great comments. People will check out your social profile from your 
profile in those comments, and that can often lead to follower growth. You can, of course, juice this a little bit by choosing rather 
than linking to your personal site if you so choose, you could link directly to the social account that you are trying to promote or 
grow followership with.

What makes a comment great? - 
Basically, every single one of these start with you must leave consistent, high-quality, great comments. Greatness in a comment means 
a few things.
1 - It's gotta be on-topic
Meaning that while you may have lots of very interesting things to share, if you go off topic, you will often turn off a lot of people
who are reading those comments. It's just not what people are there for so keep it on-topic.

2 - Respectful to the author and other commenters.
Respectful because what doesn't mean you can't disagree. In fact, I think it is great to say, "Hey, I really love this post, you made 
some great points, but point number three and four that you made here or this one and that one, I disagree with and here's why, that is 
just fine. As long as you are respectful you're in a great position to disagree and to add value as disagreement actually does add value.

3 - Provides unique value
Speaking of value, we are trying to provide unique value here. We want to provide unique value through our comments. When I say unique
value, what I mean is you can't just say things that were already in the post itself, things that have already been mentioned in other 
comments, or things that are sort of common knowledge, anyone could find them out or they're instantly recognizable, they're sort of 
already known. We want insight or tactics, help, context, examples, data, whatever it is that is not found in the original piece or 
through common knowledge. That's what makes a comment truly stand out. That's what makes people vote up a comment, click on the profile,
go check this person out. They seem really smart and intelligent and helpful.

4 - Well-written
There are a few other items. We want to be well-written — so grammar, spelling, language issues.

5 - Well-formatted
Use spacing and paragraphs, bullet points if they're available in the markup effectively to try and convey your point so that it doesn't 
look like a bunch of jammed together words and sentences. If you have a very long run-on paragraph in a comment, it can turn people off.

6 - Transparent
Finally — this is important — transparent. So you should not try and pull the wool over people's eyes in a comment. We want to not hide 
our intent or our associations. Even if you are doing comment marketing specifically as a commenting strategy to try and attract people,
you can be totally up front about that. You can say, "Hey, full disclosure, I work for company X, and I wrote this piece, but I think 
it's relevant and helpful enough that I want to bring it up here. So, with permission, hopefully I'm linking to it. Editor, feel free to
remove this link if it's not appropriate. Here's why I'm linking to it and here's what the value is that it provides." Now you've been 
transparent about your intentions and motivations, your associations, what you're doing. You will get a lot more both forgiveness and 
leeway to leave comments that are valuable if you do that.

Building a comment marketing strategy - 
Comment marketing is something you want to build a true strategy around it, not just tactically say, "Well, maybe acouple of times I'll 
leave a few comments." That's ok too, but you'll the most from this strategy if you invest in it by following a process like this:
A - Determine the goals you want to get out.
Maybe that's build exposure to get links, to grow a social audience, to try and get influencers to engage with you so that they become 
brand proponents for you in the future.

B - Create measurements
You want to build some measurement around that. Comment marketing is tough to measure, very, very tough to measure because you can't 
see how many people saw your comment. You only see the results of it. But you can look at traffic and visits that are referred to your 
site from the site on which you left the comments. You can look at growth in your social following. You could look at new links from 
sites in which you engage with in comment marketing, those kinds of things.

C. Identify list of sites/communities for engagement
Then you should identify a list of the sites or communities that you want to engage with. Those sites and communities, it is best if 
you don't say, "Hey, I'm going to try and leave one comment this year on each of 200 communities." Not valuable. Pick the top 10. 
Choose to leave 15 to 20 comments on each of them. You want to build up a reputation in these communities. You want that consistency 
so that people who are in those comments and the authors of them, the influencers who write them, consistently see you in there and 
build a positive association with you.

D. Research
Then you want to do some research. I'm urging you not to comment the first few times you read through it. Go through the backlog, look 
through their archives. Read and see what other people have commented on, see what other people have enjoyed and appreciated, see what 
comments do well and get noticed, see what the community is like.

E. Create and alert system when new content is published
Then create some sort of an alert system. This could be subscribing to updates via email or using RSS or if you follow them on Twitter 
and you get pinged every time they launch a new post, whatever it is, because early comments tend to do best. Right when a post is 
published, if you can comment in the first, let's say, 30 minutes to 3 hours, that's the best opportunity you're going to have to be 
seen by the most people reading that post.

F. Use social to help amplify/spread your comments
Finally, I would urge you to use social media, especially Twitter because that's where most publishers are, to amplify and spread your 
comments, meaning you go leave a comment and it's really high-quality, then tweet, "Hey, I just left a comment on @randfish's post here
about blah, blah, blah." Now I'm probably going to see that via Twitter, even if I don't see it via my comment alert that I get through
email, and I'm going to know, hey, this person is not only promoting their comment, they're also promoting my post. That's great. Now 
that builds further engagement with the people you're trying to reach.




Friday January 6th, 2017 - How to Kickstart an SEO Audit for Your Startup
Launching a startup is a huge task, it can be a challenge to factor SEO in but it is an incredibly important consideration.
Classic SEO pyramid which is used to ensure that youu start with a strong base and work your way up. It has been flipped it, because, 
in an audit scenario, we're actually going to start from the bottom and work our way to the top.

SEO in a startup setting can be challenging, assuming that your startup has already launched your website or your web content, your 
application, yes you should do SEO, three big reasons, three big cases why you should.
Search traffic is among the highest percentage of all referral traffic on the web. So whereas social traffic sends approximately 
5% to 6% of all the web's referral traffic, search engines send about 28% or 29% of all the web's referring traffic. 
Organic search traffic is more than 90% of all the clicks that go to search results. So 90% of the clicks are going to organic,
10% or actually less than 10% are going to the paid results. Companies around the world are spending $40, $50, $60 billion a year or 
more on Google's paid search results alone. That organic stuff is a competitive advantage because it means low cost of customer 
acquisition. It tends to mean higher retention. It tends to mean higher conversion rates. Very, very attractive traffic.
Searches are a specific request from a user that says, "I want this thing and I want it right now." That's some of the most powerful 
traffic you can possibly be in front of on the web, and, as a result, the startups that can get their product, their service, their 
company, their brand in front of those searchers can have an outsized impact.

Kicking off the audit - 
Crawling, indexing, and website structure - 
When it comes to crawling and web structure, we want:
1 - Everything on one sub and root domain.
If you can, keep everything in subfolders, or if you call them subdirectories, of your website. Don't separate out your content 
on to multiple sites, and don't build anything on somebody else's site unless you're also using it on your site and just referring back.
You want to use Medium, that's great. You want to use Facebook, great. You want to use LinkedIn Publishing, fantastic. Always have the
"Here's the link to the original" and point it to your website.
2 - You can sign up for Google Search Console (it is free).
That will help you identify a lot of crawl errors and issues. If you work with a professional SEO, chances are they're going to use a
tool like OnPage.org or Screaming Frog or Moz's Crawl. Those are all good and can provide a little bit more extra detail.
3 - Eliminate duplicates, search URLs, and thin pages
One of the things that you will want to do, when you're looking at your site, is eliminate duplicates, search URLs, meaning pages on 
your site that are essentially just search results — Google does not like your search results in their search results — and thin pages, 
pages that have very little content. You might think, "Oh, but they target some extra keywords for me." Yeah, but Google considers your 
site as a whole. If you have thousands of pages with very thin content, they're going to rank your other content lower, and that is not 
a good thing. You do not want that.

Keyword research & targeting - 
1 - Make a big, broad list.
You could do this in Excel, Google Spreadsheet, a tool like Keyword Explorer but use a bunch of different sources. I want you to look 
at keywords that your competitors are ranking for. You can find that from lots of different tools. You could use something like Keyword 
Explorer, SEMrush, KeyCompete or SpyFu. Also use the related and suggested search terms that come up when you search for the key terms 
and phrases you're already targeting in Google. I want you to use semantically-connected terms and terms that are in the format of 
questions. A lot of folks like Answer The Public. Moz also has the filter in Keyword Explorer for queries that are in the form of 
questions. These will give you a big, big, broad list.
2 - From there, you're going to need some metrics:
You want volume, you can get that from Google's AdWords Keyword Tool. You will have to either start an account and pay some money for 
some paid search ads. Otherwise, Google only shows you these terrible things. Or you're going to have to use a third-party tool like a 
SEMrush or a Keyword Explorer.
You want difficulty, so you want to know how hard it will be to rank. That is not the same as the Competition Score that you get from 
AdWords. Competition in AdWords is just the competition in the paid search results. Not the same thing as how difficult it will be to 
rank in the organic search results.
You want to know click-through rate opportunity. If there are lots of ads above the fold, if there's a knowledge graph, if there's an 
answer box up top there, that's going to drive clicks away from the organic results, and you need to know that before you choose to 
target a keyword.
3. Prioritize by the importance to you and to your company.

You're going to use these metrics and you're going to prioritize by the importance to you, to your company. You're going to prioritize 
by the ease, the difficulty, and by the traffic, which is some function of the click-through rate opportunity and the volume, in order 
to choose right keywords for you. You're going to prioritize that big list that you've got, and then you're going to start targeting. 
We are going to create content that targets those searchers and serves them well.

Accessible content that delights searchers - 
Why do I say delight searchers here in this third section? Well, because content that merely serves your purposes, that ranks and maybe 
gets one or two percent of people to convert on your site, give you their email address or sign up for whatever it is you have to sign 
up for, a free trial, or a subscription to your software, that's fine. But you're probably going to be outranked by someone who does a
fantastic job of serving searchers before putting their own interests into the mix. If you put your interest ahead of searcher's 
interest, over time, someone else is going to take that traffic away from you and Google's going to rank them first.
1 - Don't just serve your own interest, your own funnel.
Satisfy those searchers.
2. You can use low engagement metrics to identify poorly performing URLs.
So if you filter in your Google Analytics, your Omniture, whatever you've got, by pages that receive traffic from Google referrals and 
then you look at bounce rate, you look at time on site, you look at pages per visit, and you see pages that are very low on those 
metrics, well, that is going to tell you, you are not doing a great job of serving those searchers. Google will probably, over time, 
push you down, push your competitors up. That's a bad thing.

We want content that is doing a great job of delighting searchers. It has to serve both their implicit and explicit query. The explicit 
part of the query, that's usually obvious. The implicit part can be a, "What do they really want to do after that, once they have that 
answer?"

Keyword use & on-page optimization - 
Next, we're going to take that content and we are going to optimize it for search engines and searchers. That means using keywords 
intelligently and doing some smart on-page optimization.

Now, classic SEO kinds of things, some of them no longer apply. The meta keywords tag, for example, that's gone. We don't need to do the
same sort of every little variation of a keyword demands a different page that we used to do in the past. But things like...

1. Keyword use in the title, the URL, the meta description, the headline, and inside the content still matter.

What we should be doing nowadays, though, is taking all the keywords that share the same searcher intent, where the searcher is trying 
to essentially accomplish the same thing. Let's say I'm a mobile phone directory and I have a bunch of reviews of mobile phone devices. 
"Best mobile phones, best cell phones, best smartphones, best smartphones 2016," guess what? They all share the same searcher intent. 
I should have one page targeting all those keywords, not a separate one for each one.

2. All the keywords that share the same intent get one URL.

Snippet, markup, & schema - 
This is essentially where I'm trying to stand out from the pack in Google search results. If you've performed a search in the last five 
years, you know that it doesn't just look like 10 blue links anymore. There are a lot more rich options for how your snippet, the search
engine result position that you appear in, can look to searchers, and that can drive a lot more traffic.
1 - Check out Schema.org.
So check out Schema.org and check out the types of results in your specific field or industry or that go with your content that could be 
met by schema that Google supports right now.

2 - Look at your keyword research for the types of results that already appear in your SERPs.
You should be taking a look in your keyword research at the types of results that already appear in your search engine result pages. 
So if you check out your keywords, you're using a tool like Keyword Explorer, you can see here's a distribution of search results that 
contain images, ones that contain news results, ones that contain recipe-rich snippets, ones that contain video, whatever it is, and 
then you can choose to do those.

3 - Identify "answer box" opportunities.
15%, just about 15% of all search queries in Google today have an answer box of some kind. An answer box, meaning that featured snippet 
up at what we call result number 0, before the top 10, usually right after the ads. That can drive a tremendous amount more traffic. 
If you have answer box opportunities, you can take those from your competitors, or you can have your snippet appear in there. There's a
great presentation from Doctor Pete that you can check out on Moz or a Whiteboard Friday on that same topic as well.

Alternative formats & engines

Next, we want to think about non-Google sources of traffic or non-google.com web search sources of traffic. For example:

1. YouTube is the second largest search engine in the world.

YouTube is the second-largest search engine in the world, ahead of even Baidu, ahead of Bing, ahead of Yahoo. If you are doing video 
content, you should be thinking about YouTube. Even if you're not doing video content, you should be checking YouTube's search volume 
to see if lots of people are searching on YouTube for answers to the questions that your business could answer with video.

2. Consider alternative search formats like images, news, and apps.

You also want to consider alternative search formats, like images, news, and apps in lots of spaces. For example, in home decor and 
home repair, image search is very, very popular. Obviously, in spheres like politics and technology, news is very popular. For lots of
kinds of queries, apps are very popular, particularly those ones that happen on mobile and have a clear app use or need around them.

3. Check out Google Maps if you're in local.

If you are in the local space, you're going to want to check out Google Maps, which can send a tremendous amount of traffic. Through 
there, you can use a tool like Moz Local or Yext for that.

4. Ecommerce should pay attention to engines like Amazon or Etsy.

If you're in ecommerce and you're selling a physical product, there might be engines like Amazon or Etsy, where you could and should be
putting your product.

Links and amplification - 
Links still matter and they are still critical for rankings. You will need a lot of links from good places that are editorially pointing
to your content, to your website, in order to rank well. You also want to earn other forms of amplification that will then lead
to links. Social sharing is one of the big ones as is Word of mouth.
1 - Before you ever create content, ask the question: Who will help amplify this and why?
If you don't have a great answer to that question, and I mean a specific list of people or a specific list of outlets, don't Publish. 
Go and do that work first and every piece of content that you create will have more success in terms of amplification and 
reach and link potential and the potential to earn an audience. And why are you creating content if no one's going to see it? 
2 - You want to choose a link flywheel that's going to earn you links over time.
There are a few different structures.
 - News and press tends to be a good structure that earn links over time in a flywheel sort of format.
 - Content marketing tends to be one.
 - Partnerships tend to be one.
 - Embedded content tends to be one.
Flywheels tend to encounter friction, and that's where you use these smart hacks, like submissions to certain kinds of directories
that are editorial and high-quality, or outreach on a one-to-one basis. 

Conversion and funnel optimization - 
So you've done all this stuff to serve searchers well, to earn their trust and their traffic, and now we have to realize two things.
1 - Conversion takes time and it takes a lot of visits.
In fact, over time, on a second or third or fourth visit, conversion rates move up by hundreds of percents versus that first visit.
Don't expect that you're going to rank for a keyword, drive someone to your site for the first time and convert them instantly. That 
rarely happens. What's generally going to happen is that you're going to earn that click first, and then, over time, you're going to 
earn them back again, maybe through social channels, maybe through amplification, through word of mouth, through type-in traffic, 
through a branded search, through another completely unrelated search. Then eventually, they'll find their way back to you, and on the 
third or fourth or fifth visit, they will convert.
So we have to be thinking about: How can I delight people? How can I brand them? Then, eventually, I want to draw them back to my 
website and close the deal through my funnel. That's what conversion optimization is when it works in the organic world.


FAQ
A few frequently asked questions from startups:
Q - "Should I get a consultant, an agency, or should I do it in-house?"
A - If you know that SEO is going to be a long-term, competitive advantage that you continue to invest in and it's going to be something
you need to do for the life of your company, you should go in-house as soon as possible. If, however, it's (SEO) more like a 
nice-to-have and it's a helpful marketing channel, but it's not a core competency a consultant or agency can work just fine.

Q - PPC versus SEO.
A - Paid search is easy to invest in. It is high-cost, but it's fast to get started. For this reason, it's incredibly competitive, and 
it tends to be the case that people are bidding at or very close to their maximum ROI to spend ratio, meaning, unless, you have an 
incredible business model that's way better than all your competitors, there's not usually a lot of competitive advantages to be earned 
in return on investment or in cost of customer acquisition to lifetime value ratio in PPC. SEO, on the other hand, takes a long time. 
It's a lot of investment. This is often a six-month or a year process before you start earning big returns, and, therefore, very few 
people invest in it strategically. It is a much bigger competitive advantage.

Q - Can't Google just figure this all out?
A - No, they absolutely cannot. If you ignore these things and choose not to invest strategically and specifically in SEO, Google will 
not just figure it out. That has never happened to anyone who has made SEO a true competitive advantage in their startup, in their 
company's marketing channels. It's just not how it works.

Q - "Does social media impact SEO?"
A - The answer is yes, but indirectly. When you do good things on social, they can lead to good links. They can lead to good engagement 
on your site, which is certainly a positive signal for Google, and they can lead to word of mouth, which can result in branded searches 
and more clickstream traffic to your site, and all these sorts of things that Google can see. But if you think that buying a bunch of 
likes or a bunch of tweets on Fiverr is going to help your page rank higher, yeah, you're in for, well, five dollars of pain.
