                    Notes from Moz.com Whiteboard Friday tutorials 2016
                    https://moz.com/blog/category/whiteboard-friday
                    
                    
Friday 30th December - How you can have a remarkable, amazing SEO strategy in 2017. 
Understanding some of those big-picture search trends. What are the search engines doing? 
How is that affecting my strategy? How does that mean I should influence and affect my specific tactics for 2017? 

1 - Understand the big-picture search trends
A huge rise in SERP features, meaning that Google is showing many more types of data and types of markup in the search results. 
A rise in instant answers - especially true on mobile, but it's true on desktop as well. Google is trying to answer a lot of queries 
themselves which means taking away traffic from your site
Intent > keywords: Searcher intent being more important than keywords in how we target our content, it doesn't mean you can remove 
keywords from the equation. You have to understand what the searcher has typed into the engine before you can serve their intent, 
and very small variations in keyword structure can mean real changes in searcher intent.
The value of comprehensiveness has clearly been on the rise and it definitely is a trend that is expected to continue into 2017. 
Multi-device speed and user experience,Google has taken action against overlays and pop-ups. They've taken action, clearly, 
that suggests that there are some engagement metrics that are going on there, and that sites that have better user experience and 
that garner better engagement are doing better in the search results.
There are trends around unreliability of Google data. That includes search volume data. It includes data in AdWords, around Google 
showing you which keywords are in there. It includes inaccuracies in Google Search Console, formerly Webmaster Tools, around rankings. 
if Google says you got this many impressions and this many clicks, that may be wrong and false, so be cautious.
Voice search, clearly on the rise. Not yet a huge trend in terms of an market that search marketers can go after, but SEO should
think about voice search impacting your results in the future and what types of content you might want to be ahead.
Machine learning and deep learning, Google has clearly made a shift to that in the last 18 months, it affect the search results in 
terms of how they're considering links, how they're looking at keyword searches, and how they're looking at content.
Multi-visit buyer journeys have always been important and a lot of sites are optimizing for it, which means that the competitive 
that you don't just consider a single visit in your conversion path or in your optimization path, and that means, for SEOs, considering 
what are all the queries someone might perform as they come to and come back to my site.
Bias to brands, that is a continuing trend over the last few years. We're still seeing it, and we're seeing it even more so. I would 
say we're seeing it even when those brands have not necessarily earned tons of links, which used to be the big dominating factor in 
the world of is a brand stronger than a non-brand. A lot of times that was about links. Now it seems that those are decoupled.
Undiminished value of links. If you've built a brand, if you've done a lot of these things successfully, links are certainly how you 
can stand out in the search results. 

2 - Map your organizations top-level goals to how your SEO efforts can best assist:
Step two is to map your organization's top-level goals to your SEO tactics, and that can look something like this.
Here's Zow Corporate, the opposite of Moz, which is hopefully not very corporate. Zow Corporate's big three for 2017, they want to 
grow revenue with new enterprise customers, they want to lower their costs to get more profitable, and they want to improve their 
upsell to existing customers. So SEO can help with these things by — and this is a really smart framework — you want to take the 
things that your organization wants to accomplish at its executive or board level, and you want to show that SEO is actually doing 
those things, not just that you're trying to rank for keywords or bring more traffic, but that you've mapped your priorities in this 
way.

3 - Build a keyword-to-content map
The basic concept is to have a list of terms and phrases that come out of your tactics and your goals, that you build a map for 
and then show like, "All right, here's how we're ranking today. Here's the URL which we're ranking with," or, "We don't yet have a URL 
that's targeting this keyword phrase, and thus, we need to build it," and then the action required there and what the priority is.

4 - Break down the SEO efforts into discrete projects with ETAs and people assigned, ordered by expected ROI
You can also think about adding some additional things to your content-to-keyword map or to your project list by breaking down all 
the SEO efforts that you're going to do to hit all these goals into discrete projects with a few things — an estimated time of delivery,
the people who are assigned to it, and an ordering based on the expected return on investment.

5 - Build a reporting/measurement system that shows progress and ties revenue/goals to clear metrics:
Step five - Build a reporting and measurement system that's going to show progress, not just internally but to the entire team, 
or to your client so that they can see progress this gives a real picture of how SEO efforts map up to these big-picture goals. 
It's a great way to frame SEO campaigns.




Friday December 23rd, 2016 - Exchanging More Value with Contributors to Your Content and Community Efforts
3 major groups make up your community exchangers of value - 

1 - Commenters and on-site contributors
Traditionally, the contributions look like this. These people, when they leave comments are seeking answers and visibility, so they 
want to show maybe something that they have done, and they also want an answer or a reply from you or from someone in the 
community. They have questions about it, for you, you know they're creating more content and SEO for you, which is great. One of the big 
values of comments is that the engines can crawl them and can help you rank for more long tail stuff and with engagement metrics.

2 - Social media followers and fans
Now, shares and replies on social, it's essentially you are helping to ... when you create content and when you, whether that's content 
on the social media platform or on your own website, that you're amplifying, when other people share that content or they like it, they 
reply to it, they amplify it, that's new fans and followers and content for them, hopefully, and it's more reach and visibility for you.

3 - Influencers, experts, and amplifiers
With influencers, experts, and amplifiers, pretty much the story is like more influence for them through contributing to your content or
promoting your content, and more reach for you through those influencers and experts' audiences. This is certainly powerful and useful 
too with roundups, which I think, unfortunately, have become the default style in which people use influencers and experts in many, 
many fields. It's more visibility for them, hopefully, because they appear in that roundup. They have their names cited and all that 
kind of thing. You're hoping that they're going to share it and amplify that content so that you get more reach to their audience. 

How to exchange value by thinking broadly and daring to be different - Being the exception to this rule can be hugely helpful. 
If everyone else is doing something in one way, doing it a different way will fundamentally add more value to your content and SEO.

Personal profiles - So if we're talking about these commenters and on-site contributors, think about profiles. This is something that 
most comment plug-ins don't allow by default. Disqus creates a profile, but that profile lives on Disqus' site, not on your site. 
There's fundamental value to having those profiles and you can own that content, can now promote that page or rank in search engines. 

Edit/citation suggestions and highlights - Edit and citation suggestions like places like Wikipedia have. Others have notable ones eg 
Medium, has the highlighted section.

Featured comments - Featured comments, which places like The New York Times do, I think if you are an editorial content creator and you
want to amplify the visibility of comments and encourage people to share great comments, a featured comment system is a valuable one. 
With social media folks you can create content that features social contributions, thus encouraging people to follow you and contribute 
and reply to and amplify your tweets or Facebook shares or LinkedIn because they will get additional visibility from that.

Data via polls and surveys - Think about collection and amplification of data that you collect through polls and short surveys. 
Facebook and Twitter are great about allowing those.

Sharing others' social accounts - Promotion of other people's social accounts. One of the things that I think far too few social 
accounts do is actually call someone out by name and say, "Hey, this is another really valuable page on Facebook that you should 
check out." Or, "This person did this wonderful thing." 

Using social for testimonials and promotional content - Use of social, of course, in testimonial and promotional content can give 
win-win to sites as sharing social content is mutually beneficial and is a wonderful way to creatively use that same type of content.

Smart influencer roundups, such as helpful email lists - And last, with influencers, with experts, with amplifiers, I think there's 
vastly more ways to do this in roundups. First off, I've seen some folks create some great email discussion, the help-each-other type 
of lists. I'm part of a few of those. I love them. There's great content on there. I think this is a wonderful way to get influencers 
and experts on your side in the long term and to help them help each other as well as you.

Focus on data above quotations alone - Surveys and data gathering, roundups that just are text only and have a bunch of text, 
rather than show data from a lot of influencers and saying,"Hey, you know, we interviewed 100 startup CEOs and we got these 5 data 
points from each of them, and here are the distributions." 

Featured commentary - Essentially, you share content with influencers. You say, "Hey, if you have some featured comments or some ideas
around that, send that back and we will include it in the launch of that content.

Discussion and debate as content - Discussion or debate as actual content, where sites invite on guest contributors and experts and 
then they feature that discussion. Some other political sites utilise this strategy
