March 10th, 2017 - Better Alternatives to "Expert Roundup"
This week we're going to look at some better alternatives to the expert roundup-style content that's become extremely popular on the
web. There are a few reasons why it's popular. So let's talk about why SEOs and content marketers do so many expert roundups, why 
this became a popular content format.
Why do SEOs and content marketers even use "expert roundups?"
Okay. It turns out if you've got a piece of content that's like "75 Experts Share Their Favorite Constitutional Law Cases," maybe you
interviewed a bunch of constitutional laws scholars and you put together this article, there's a bunch of nice things that you actually
do get from this, which is why people use this format, right?

You kind of get automatic outreach, because if you talk to these people, you've had a connection with them. You've built a little bit of a relationship. There's now something of an incentive to share for these folks and the potential for a link. All of those are sort of elements that people are looking for, well, that marketers are looking for from their content.

The nice thing is you've got this long cadre of individuals who have contributed, and they create the content, which means you don't have to, saving you a bunch of time and energy. They become your amplifier so you can kind of sit back and relax when it comes time to broadcast it out there. You just tell them it's ready, and they go and push it. They lend your content credibility. So even if you don't have any credibility with your brand or with your website, they deliver it for you. You don't have to do that.

There are a few big problems with this kind of content.

Those are all really nice things. Don't get me wrong. I understand why. But there are some big, big problems with expert roundup-style content.

1. Like many easy-to-replicate tactics, expert roundups become WAY overdone.
First one, like many of the easy to replicate tactics, expert roundup has got spam to hack. They became way, way overdone.
I love that every day there are a couple of offers like this in my inbox. 
I try to contribute to less than one every two or three weeks and only the ones that look super credible and real interesting. But jeez, 
can you imagine if you are truly an expert, who can lend credibility and create lots of amplification, you're getting overwhelmed with 
these kinds of requests, and people are probably getting very tired of reading them, especially in certain market segments where they've
become way too overdone.
2. It's hard for searchers to get valuable, useful info via this format — and search engines don't like it, either.


But even if it's the case that you can get all these experts to contribute and it's not overdone in your market space, there are two other big problems. One, the content format is awful, awful for trying to get valuable and useful information. It rarely actually satisfies either searchers or engines. 

If you search for constitutional law cases and you see "75 Experts Share Their Favorite Constitutional Law Cases," you might click. But my god, have you gone through those types of content? Have you tried to read a lot of those roundups? They are usually awful, just terrible.

You might get a nugget here or there, but there's a bunch of contributions that are multiple paragraphs long and try to include links back to wherever the expert is trying to get their links going. There's a bunch of them that are short and meaningless. Many of them overlap. 

It's annoying. It's bad. It's not well-curated. It's not well-put together. There are exceptions. Sometimes people put real effort into them and they get good, but most of the time these are real bad things, and you rarely see them in the search results. 

BuzzSumo did a great analysis of content that gets shares and gets links and gets rankings. Guess what did not fall into it — expert roundups.

3. Roundups don't earn as many links, and the traffic spike from tweets is temporary.


Number three. That's number three. The links that the creators want from these roundups, that they're hoping they're going to get, it doesn't end up there most of the time. What usually happens is you get a short traffic spike, some additional engagement, some additional activity on mostly Twitter, sometimes a little bit Facebook or LinkedIn, but it's almost all social activity, and it's a very brief spike.

5 formats to try instead

So what are some better alternatives? What are some things we can do? Well, I've got five for you.

1. Surveys


First off, if you're going to be creating content that is around a roundup, why not do almost exactly the same process, but rather than asking a single question or a set of questions that people are replying to, ask them to fill out a short survey with a few data points, because then you can create awesome graphs and visuals, which have much stronger link earning potential. It's the same outreach effort, but for much more compelling content that often does a better job of ranking, is often more newsworthy and link worthy. I really, really like surveys, and I think that they can work tremendously well if you can put them together right.

2. Aggregations of public data


Second, let's say you go, "Oh, Rand, that would be great, but I want to survey people about this thing, and they won't give me the information that I'm looking for." Never fear. You can aggregate public data. 

So a lot of these pieces of information that may be interesting to your audience, that you could use to create cool visuals, the graphs and charts and all that kind of thing and trend lines, are actually available on the web. All you need to do is cite those sources, pull in that data, build it yourself, and then you can outreach to the people who are behind these companies or these organizations or these individuals, and then say, "Hey, I made this based on public data. Can you correct any errors?" Now you've got the outreach, which can lead to the incentive to share and to build a link. Very cool.

3. Experiments and case studies


So this is taking a much smaller group, saying, "I'm only going to work with this one person or these couple of people, or I'm going to do it myself. Here's what Seattle's most influential law firm found when they challenged 10 state laws." Well, there you go. Now I've got an interesting, wholly formed case study. I only had to work with one expert, but chances are good that lots and lots of people will be interested in this. It's also excellent for newsworthiness. It often can get lots of press coverage in whatever industry you're in.

4. Seeking out controversial counter-opinions on a topic


Fourth, if you're going to do a roundup-style thing and you're going to collect multiple opinions, if you can find a few points or a single subject around which multiple experts have different opinions, that could be just two people, it could be four or five, it could be seven or eight, but you're basically trying to create this controversy. 

You're saying like, "Here are these people on this side of this issue. Here are these people on this side of this issue, Wil Reynolds versus Rand Fishkin on link building." I think we did a presentation like that in Minneapolis last year or a couple years ago. It was super fun. Wil and I got up on stage, and we sort of debated with each other. There were no losers in that debate. It was great. 

This leverages the emotional response you're seeking of conflict. It creates more engaging content by far, and there's more incentive for the parties who participate to link and share, because they're sort of showing off their opinion and trying to make counterpoints. You can get a lot of good things.

5. Not just text!

Number five. If you've decided, "You know what? None of these formats or any others work. I really, really want to do a roundup. I think it can work for me," okay. But do me a favor and try something that is not just text, not just text.

Muzli is a newsletter I subscribe to in the design world that does lots of roundup-style content, but the roundups are all visuals. They're visuals. They're like UI interactions and GIFs and animations and illustrations. I actually really love those. Those get great engagement, and they rank, by the way. They rank quite well. Many of the ones that they link to in the newsletter do well. 

You can do this with visuals. You can do it with data. You could do it with revenue numbers. You could do it with tools. You could do it with products, whatever it is. 

I would suggest thinking a little more broadly than, "Dear Fishkin, I roundup. You write." I think that there's a lot more opportunity outside of the pure expert roundup space, and I hope you'll share your creative ideas with us and the successes you've seen.




March 3rd, 2017 - Aren't 301s, 302s, and Canonicals All Basically the Same?
It's a question that looks something like this: Aren't 301s, 302s, and canonicals all basically the same?
"No, they're not." But you may want the more nuanced approach.
A 301 redirect situation is what we call a permanent redirect. What we're trying to accomplish is something like this. We have an 
old URL, URL A, and let's say for example a couple years ago Moz moved our entire site from seomoz.org to moz.com. That was a 
permanent change, and so we wanted to tell Google two things and all bots and browsers:
First of all, send the people to the new URL, and, second,
pass all the signals. All these equity, PR, ranking signals, whatever you want to call them, authority, that should go to the new page 
as well. So people and bots should both end up on this new page.
A classic 302 situation is something like a one-day sale. So what we're saying is for some reason we have this main page with the 
product. We can't put the sale information on that page. We need a new URL. Maybe it's our CMS, maybe it's a political thing, doesn't
matter. So we want to do a 302, a temporary redirect that says, "Hey, you know what? All the signals, all the ranking signals, the PR,
for Google's sake keep the old page. That's the main one. But send people to this other page just for a couple of days, and then we're 
going to take that away."
So these do two different things. One of these tells the bots, "Hey, this is the new home," and the other one tells it, "Hey, stick 
around here. This is going to come back, but we want people to see the new thing."
So I think sometimes Google interprets our meaning and can change things around.

Why are these differentiations important?
The problem is this. In the real world, we end up with things like this, we have page W that 301s to page T that 302s to page F and 
page F rel=canonicals back to page W, and Google reads this and says, "W, T, F." What do we do? We sent bad signals. We've done 
something that just doesn't make sense, and Google is forced to interpret us, and that's a very difficult thing. We do a lot of strange
things. We'll set up 302s because that's what's in our CMS, that's what's easy in an Apache rewrite file. We forget to change it to a 
301. Our devs don't know the difference, and so we end up with a lot of ambiguous situations, a lot of mixed signals, and Google is 
trying to help us. Sometimes they don't help us very well, but they just run into these problems a lot. In this case, the bots have no 
idea where to go. The people are going to end up on that last page, but the bots are going to have to choose, and they're probably 
going to choose badly because our intent isn't clear.

How are 301s, 302s, and rel=canonical different?
So there are a couple situations I want to cover, because I think they're fairly common and I want to show that this is complex. 
Google can interpret, but there are some reasons and there's some rhyme or reason.
1. Long-term 302s may be treated as 301s.
So the first one is that long-term 302s are probably going to be treated as 301s. They don't make any sense. If you set up a 302 and
you leave it for six months, Google is going to look at that and say, "You know what? I think you meant this to be permanent and you 
made a mistake. We're going to pass ranking signals, and we're going to send people to page B." I think that generally makes sense.
Some types of 302s just don't make sense at all. So if you're migrating from non-secure to secure, from HTTP to HTTPS and you set up a 
302, that's a signal that doesn't quite make sense. Why would you temporarily migrate? This is probably a permanent choice, and so in
that case, and this is actually what John was addressing in this post originally, in that case Google is probably going to look at
that and say, "You know what? I think you meant 301s here," and they're going to pass signals to the secure version. We know they 
prefer that anyway, so they're going to make that choice for you.
If you're confused about where the signals are going, then look at the page that's ranking, because in most cases the page that Google 
chooses to rank is the one that's getting the ranking signals. It's the one that's getting the PR and the authority.
So if you have a case like this, a 302, and you leave it up permanently and you start to see that Page B is the one that's being 
indexed and ranking, then Page B is probably the one that's getting the ranking signals. So Google has interpreted this as a 301. 
If you leave a 302 up for six months and you see that Google is still taking people to Page A, then Page A is probably where the 
ranking signals are going.
So that can give you an indicator of what their decision is. It's a little hard to reverse that. But if you've left a 302 in place for 
six months, then I think you have to ask yourself, "What was my intent? What am I trying to accomplish here?"
Part of the problem with this is that when we ask this question, "Aren't 302s, 301s, canonicals all basically the same?" what we're 
really implying is, "Aren't they the same for SEO?" I think this is a legitimate but very dangerous question, because, yes, we need to 
know how the signals are passed and, yes, Google may pass ranking signals through any of these things. But for people they're very
different, and this is important.

2. Rel=canonical is for bots, not people.
Talk about rel=canonical briefly because rel=canonical is a bit different. We have Page A and Page B again, and we're going
to canonical from Page A to Page B. What we're basically saying with this is, "Look, I want you, the bots, to consider Page B to be the 
main page. You know, for some reason I have to have these near duplicates. I have to have these other copies. But this is the main one. 
This is what I want to rank. But I want people to stay on Page A."
So this is entirely different from a 301 where I want people and bots to go to Page B. That's different from a 302, where I'm going to 
try to keep the bots where they are, but send people over here.
So take it from a user perspective. I have had in Q&A all the time people say, "Well, I've heard that rel=canonical passes ranking 
signals. Which should I choose? Should I choose that or 301? What's better for SEO?"
That's true. We do think it generally passes ranking signals, but for SEO is a bad question, because these are completely different 
user experiences, and either you're going to want people to stay on Page A or you're going to want people to go to Page B.

Why this matters, both for bots and for people
So I just want you to keep in mind, when you look at these three things, it's true that 302s can pass PR. But if you're in a situation
where you want a permanent redirect, you want people to go to Page B, you want bots to go to Page B, you want Page B to rank, use the 
right signal. Don't confuse Google. They may make bad choices. Some of your 302s may be treated as 301s. It doesn't make them the same, 
and a rel=canonical is a very, very different situation that essentially leaves people behind and sends bots ahead.

So keep in mind what your use case actually is, keep in mind what your goals are, and don't get over-focused on the ranking signals 
themselves or the SEO uses because all off these three things have different purposes.
