                    Bullet Proof Local SEO Monthly Advanced - Private Blog Networks
                   
                    Section 1 - Advanced Linking
Two main things focused on URL and anchor text as far as optimization goes. Every update that comes along when I track URL in Anchor 
Text optimization that always seems to be where these uptakes land in the end because it always seems to be coming with optimization. 
A lot of SEOs will focus on Panda 4.1 hit ads above the fold. I don't even pay attention to what each update hits and what they 
say it's about, because when I look at my data I just compare the URL and Anchor Text correlations and see what's going on with that.  
I'm just telling you it's so important to understand URL and Anchor Text combinations and what's working right now with URL and Anchor 
Text that it's really important that you get a history of it to kind of show you the evolution that Google has come up with as far as 
the combination between the two, so it'll give you a better understanding of what's working now and why it's working
EMD - Exact Match Domain, which would be your key word as your domain name and then you could fire off links, have 90% of those links 
be your exact match key word and rank Number 1.  
Example used is DelawareSEO.org and I owned this domain. This domain has 2 links to it, we're Number 1, and 
Number 2 and then our video Number 3. Again, just one or two links. I can show you the anchor text, probably in the next video though 
to use for that. I'll get plenty of real examples that I have used, and also hypothetical based off of real examples. Actually there 
won't even be hypothetical, I'll just have to change domain names so you don't know the actual sites. There's some sites I font 'want 
to reveal. 
If you had DelawareSEO.org a few years ago and you know those types of tools and you just sent thousands of links and 90% of them equal 
DelawareSEO, then a few years ago this would get you ranking Number 1, because it was more about they were saying the more links you
have that say this, then that must mean that that's what you're sites' about. 
Well, as SEO got more popular they started seeing more and more people take advantage of this so they started changing it a little bit. 
What worked as 90% a few years ago, a year later you would get hit with over optimization penalties and only 60% would work now. 
Then, the EMD update came and this number dropped again. This is for the most part it does depend how many searches the key word gets 
and how many links you have an how many credible links, but for the most part this rule would generally apply to most situations have. 
Unless you're a site like BestBuy.com where you just have tons and tons of great authority links, then that number can go up. Also if 
you're a well-established brand that number can go up, but when you have a new sight like most of us are going to be doing these are 
the general rules that I'm talking about. Then the EMD update came and this number dropped down again. Probably somewhere around 30%, 
something like that. Of course it also depends how many links you have and how authoritative those links are, I'm just giving a general 
number to show you the evolution. 
Then we started seeing, with the Penguin update we started getting inner URLs targeted, where you could have GregsSite.com/DelawareSEO. 
After the EMD update now they started targeting inner URLs, so not just the domain name, but also inner URLs, your key word as the page 
name. This is getting even more aggressive over the last year of so. They're getting more aggressive over this where if you have an 
inner URL as the key word it's like getting treated as an EMD was as couple of years ago.So they keep going more and more after over 
optimization where they know what SEOs are doing and they're catching onto the latest tricks and they just evolve. 


                    Section 2 - Advanced Linking 2
The length of the domain name and the amount of searches the keyword gets makes a difference to how much anchor text you can use with
that keyword, it makes a difference to how much optimization you can get away with.
Not recommended having an EMD overly long by the way, or any domain name this long. 
Keywords in the domain name are more powerful than the keywords in the inner URL, but at the same time, the keywords in the domain 
name get more strict over optimization rules than the inner URL. 
When you have your keywords in your domain name, try not to repeat them in the inner URL's. There's certain circumstances where you can, 
and fof an example here. If  using themoneymasters.com or something like that, and then I want to do a page on how to make money online,
we have money in the domain name but it's okay to repeat it in here because again, it's such a big keyword, and it just makes sense to 
repeat it.
If you have a keyword fairly long as your domain name, like an EMD, dont ever repeat something that long on the inner URL.
