Friday April 21st, 2017 - Pop-Ups, Overlays, Modals, Interstitials, and How They Interact with SEO
Pop-ups, overlays, modals, interstitials, and all things like them have specific kinds of interactions with SEO. In addition to Google
having some guidelines around them, they also can change how people interact with your website, and that can adversely or positively 
affect you accomplishing your goals, SEO and otherwise.
Types
So let's walk through what these elements, these design and UX elements do, how they work, and best practices for how we should be 
thinking about them and how they might interfere with our SEO efforts.
Pop-ups
So, first up, let's talk specifically about what each element is. A pop-up now, okay, there are a few kinds. There are pop-ups that 
happen in new windows. New window pop-ups are, basically, new window, no good. Google hates those. They are fundamentally against them.
Many browsers will stop them automatically. Chrome does. Firefox does. In fact, users despise these as well. There are still some
spammy and sketchy sites out there that use them, but, generally speaking, bad news.
Overlays
When we're talking about a pop-up that happens in the same browser window, essentially it's just a visual element, that's often also 
referred to as an overlay. So, for the purposes of this Whiteboard Friday, we'll call that an overlay. An overlay is basically like 
this, where you have the page's content and there's some smaller element, a piece, a box, a window, a visual of some kind that comes
up and that essentially says, maybe it says, "Sign up for my email newsletter," and then there's a place to enter your email, or, 
"Get my book now," and you click that and get the book. Those types of overlays are pretty common on the web, and they do not 
create quite the same problems that pop-ups do, at least from Google's perspective. However, we'll talk about those later, there
are some issues around them, especially with mobile.
Modals
Modals tend to be windows of interaction, tend to be more elements of use. So lightboxes for images is a very popular modal. A modal
is something where you are doing work inside that new box rather than in the content that's underneath it. So a sign-in form that 
overlays, that pops up over the rest of the content, but that doesn't allow you to engage with this content underneath it, that would 
be considered a modal. Generally, most of the time, these aren't a problem, unless they are something like spam, or advertising, or 
something that's taking you out of the user experience.
Interstitials
Then finally, interstitials are essentially, and many of these can also be called interstitial experiences, but a classic interstitial 
is something like what Forbes.com does. When you visit Forbes, an article for the first time, you get this, "Welcome. Our sponsor of 
the day is Brawndo. Brawndo, it has what plants need." Then you can continue after a certain number of seconds. These really piss
people off, myself included. I really hate the interstitial experience. I understand that it's an advertising thing. But, yeah, Google 
hates them too. Not quite enough to kick Forbes out of their SERPs entirely yet, but, fingers crossed, it will happen sometime soon. 
They have certainly removed plenty of other folks who have gone with invasive or overly heavy interstitials over the years and made 
those pretty tough.

What are the factors that matter for SEO?
A) Timing
Well, it turns out timing is a big one. So when the element appears matters. Basically, if the element shows up initially upon page
load, they will consider it differently than if it shows up after a few minutes. So, for example, if you have a "Sign Up Now" overlay 
that pops up the second you visit the page, that's going to be treated differently than something that happens when you're 80% or 
you've just finished scrolling through an entire blog post. That will get treated very differently. Or it may have no effect actually 
on how Google treats the SEO, and then it really comes down to how users do. 
Then how long does it last as well. So interstitials, especially those advertising interstitials, there are some issues governing that 
with people like Forbes. There are also some issues around an overlay that can't be closed and how long a window can pop up, especially
if it shows advertising and those types of things. Generally speaking, obviously, shorter is better, but you can get into trouble even
with very short ones.
B) Interaction
Can that element easily be closed, and does it interfere with the content or readability? So Google's new mobile guidelines, I think as 
of just a few months ago, now state that if an overlay or a modal or something interferes with a visitor's ability to read the actual 
content on the page, Google may penalize those or remove their mobile-friendly tags and remove any mobile-friendly benefit. 
C) Content
So there's an exception or an exclusion to a lot of Google's rules around this, which is if you have an element that is essentially 
asking for the user's age, or asking for some form of legal consent, or giving a warning about cookies, which is very popular in the EU,
of course, and the UK because of the legal requirements around saying, "Hey, this website uses cookies," and you have to agree to it, 
those kinds of things, that actually gets around Google's issues. So Google will not give you a hard time if you have an overlay 
interstitial or modal that says, "Are you of legal drinking age in your country? Enter your birth date to continue." They will not
necessarily penalize those types of things.
Advertising, on the other hand, advertising could get you into more trouble, as we have discussed. If it's a call to action for the 
website itself, again, that could go either way. If it's part of the user experience, generally you are just fine there. Meaning 
something like a modal where you get to a website and then you say, "Hey, I want to leave a comment," and so there's a modal that 
makes you log in, that type of a modal. Or you click on an image and it shows you a larger version of that image in a modal, again,
no problem. That's part of the user experience.

D) Conditions
Conditions matter as well. So if it is triggered from SERP visits versus not, meaning that if you have an exclusionary protocol in your 
interstitial, your overlay, your modal that says, "Hey, if someone's visiting from Google, don't show this to them," or "If someone's 
visiting from Bing, someone's visiting from DuckDuckGo, don't show this to them," that can change how the search engines perceive it as 
well.It's also the case that this can change if you only show to cookied or logged in or logged out types of users. Now, logged out 
types of users means that everyone from a search engine could or will get it. But for logged in users, for example, you can imagine 
that if you visit a page on a social media site and there's a modal that includes or an overlay that includes some notification around
activity that you've already been performing on the site, now that becomes more a part of the user experience. That's not necessarily 
going to harm you. Where it can hurt is the other way around, where you get visitors from search engines, they are logged out, and you 
require them to log in before seeing the content. Quora had a big issue with this for a long time, and they seem to have mostly 
resolved that through a variety of measures, and they're fairly sophisticated about it. But you can see that Facebook still struggles 
with this, because a lot of their content, they demand that you log in before you can ever view or access it. That does keep some of
their results out of Google, or certainly ranking lower.

E) Engagement impact
I think this is what Google's ultimately trying to measure and what they're trying to essentially say, "Hey, this is why we have these 
issues around this," which is if you are hurting the click-through rate or you're hurting pogo-sticking, meaning that more people are
clicking onto your website from Google and then immediately clicking the Back button when one of these things appears, that is a sign to
Google that you have provided a poor user experience, that people are not willing to jump through whatever hoop you've created for them 
to get access your content, and that suggests they don't want to get there. 

Best practices
So some best practices around using all these types of elements on your website. I would strongly urge you to avoid elements that are 
significantly harming UX. If you're willing to take a small sacrifice in user experience in exchange for a great deal of value because 
you capture people's email addresses or you get more engagement of other different kinds, okay. But this would be something I'd watch.

There are three or four metrics that I'd urge you to check out to compare whether this is doing the right thing. Those are:
Bounce rate
Browse rate
Return visitor rates, meaning the percentage of people who come back to your site again and again, and
Time on site after the element appears
So those four will help tell you whether you are truly interfering badly with user experience.
On mobile, ensure that your crucial content is not covered up, that the reading experience, the browsing experience isn't covered up by
one of these elements. Please, whatever you do, make those elements easy and obvious to dismiss. This is part of Google's guidelines
around it, but it's also a best practice, and it will certainly help your user experience metrics.
Only choose to keep one of these elements if you are finding that the sacrifice... and there's almost always a sacrifice cost, like you
will hurt bounce rate or browse rate or return visitor rate or time on site. You will hurt it. The question is, is it a slight enough
hurt in exchange for enough gain, and that's that trade-off that you need to decide whether it's worth it. I think if you are hurting 
visitor interaction by a few seconds on average per visit, but you are getting 5% of your visitors to give you an email address, that's
probably worth it. If it's more like 30 seconds and 1%, maybe not as good.
Consider removing the elements from triggering if the visit comes from search engines. So if you're finding that this works fine and
great, but you're having issues around search guidelines, you could consider potentially just removing the element from any visit that
comes directly from a search engine and instead placing that in the content itself or letting it happen on a second page load, assuming
that your browse rate is decently high. That's a fine way to go as well.
If you are trying to get the most effective value out of these types of elements, it tends to be the case that the less common and
less well used the visual element is, the more interaction and engagement it's going to get. But the other side of that coin is that 
it can create a more frustrating experience. So if people are not familiar with the overlay or modal or interstitial visual layout 
design that you've chosen, they may engage more with it. They might not dismiss it out of hand, because they're not used to it yet, 
but they can also get more frustrated by it. So, again, return to looking at those metrics.




Friday April 21st, 2017 
Article on Net Neutrality not applicable to SEO


Friday April 14th, 2017 Launching a New Website: Your SEO Checklist
Launching a new website and the SEO process that you've got to go through. 
1. Keyword to URL map for your content
Go and do some keyword research. There are a lot of Whiteboard Fridays and blog posts about great ways to do keyword research. 
But do that keyword research and create a list that essentially maps all of the keywords you are initially targeting to all of the URLs, 
the pages that you have on your new website.
Example It's got the URL, so RandsAnimals.com, targeting the keyword "amazing animals," and here's the
page title and here's the meta description. Then, I've got RandsAnimals.com/lemurs, which is my page about lemurs, and that's 
targeting "lemurs" and "lemur habits." There's the title.
You want to go through these and make sure that if you have an important keyword that you have not yet targeted, you do so, and 
likewise, that if you've got a URL, a page on your website that you have not yet intentionally targeted a keyword with, you make sure
to do that as well. This can be a great way to go through a small site in the early stages and make sure that you've got some terms 
and phrases that you're actually targeting. This will be also helpful when you do your rank tracking and your on-page optimization 
later on.

2. Accessibility, crawl, and UX
So what I want you to do here is to ask yourself:
I. "Are the pages and the content on my website accessible to search engines?"
There are some great ways to check these. You can use something like Screaming Frog or Google Search Console. to basically run a scan 
of your site and make sure that crawlers can get to all the pages, that you don't have duplicate content, that you don't have thin 
content or pages that are perceived to have no content at all, you don't have broken links, you don't have broken pages.
II. "Is the content accessible to all audiences, devices, and browsers?"
We're going to ask not about search engines and their crawlers, but about the audience, the human beings and whether your content is
accessible to all the audiences, devices, and browsers that it could be. So this could mean things like screen readers for blind users, 
mobile devices, desktop devices, laptops, browsers of all different kinds. You're going to want to use a tool like a browser checker to 
make sure that Chrome, Firefox, and... What's Internet Explorer called now? Oh, man. They changed it. Microsoft Edge. Make sure that it 
works in all of them. I like that I think that there's a peanut gallery who's going to yell it out. 
III. "Do those pages load fast from everywhere?"
Could use a tool like Google Speed Test, can also do some proxy checking to make sure that from all sorts of regions, especially if 
I'm doing international targeting or if I know that I'm going to be targeting rural regions that my pages load fast from everywhere.
IV. "Is the design, UI, visuals, and experience enjoyable and easy for all users?"
You can do that with some in-house usability testing. You could do it informally with friends and family and existing customers if you 
have them. Or you could use something like Five Second Test or UsabilityHub to run some more formal testing online. Sometimes this can
reveal things in your navigation or your content that's just stopping people from having the experience that you want — that's very 
easy to fix.

3. Setup of important services and tracking
Web analytics - Google Analytics is free and very, very popular. But you could also use something like Piwik, or if you're bigger,
Omniture. You're going to want to do a crawl. OnPage or Moz Pro, or some of these other ones will check to make sure that your 
analytics are actually loaded on all of your pages.
Uptime tracking - If you haven't checked them out, Pingdom has some very cheap plans for very early-stage sites. Then, if you get 
bigger, they can get more expensive and more sophisticated.
Retargeting and remarketing - Even if you don't want to pay now and you're not going to use any of the services, go ahead and put the 
retargeting pixels from at least Facebook and Google onto your website, on all of your pages, so that those audiences are accessible to
you later on in the future.
Set up some brand alerts - The cheapest option is Google Alerts, which is free, but it's not very good at all. If you're using Moz Pro,
there's Fresh Web Explorer alerts, which is great. Mention.net is also good, Talkwalker, Trackur. There's a number of options there that
are paid and a little bit better.
Google Search Console - If you haven't set that up already, you're going to want to do that, as well as Bing Webmaster Tools. Both of
those can reveal some errors to you. So if you have accessibility issues, that's a good free way to go.
Moz/Ahrefs/SEMRush/Searchmetrics/Raven/etc. - If you are doing SEO, chances are good that you're going to want to set up some type of
an SEO tool to track your rankings and do a regular crawl, show you competitive opportunities and missteps, potentially show you 
link-building opportunities, all that kind of stuff. I would urge you to check out one of probably these five. There are a few other
ones. But these five are pretty popular — Moz, Ahrefs, SEMRush, Searchmetrics, or Raven. Those are some of the best known ones certainly
out there.
Social and web profiles - Again, important to set those up before you launch your new site, so that no one goes and jumps on the name 
of your Facebook page, or your Pinterest page, or your Instagram profile page, or your YouTube page, or your SlideShare page. I know 
you might be saying, "But Rand, I don't use SlideShare." No, not today. But you might in the future, and trust me, you're going to want
to claim Rand's Animals on YouTube and SlideShare. You're going to want to claim whatever your website's name is. I'll go claim this
one later. But you've got to set all those up, because you don't want someone else taking them later. I would urge you to go down the
full list of all the social media sites out there, all the web profiles out there, just to make sure that you've got your brand secured.

4. Schema, rich snippets, OpenGraph, etc
Optimization in general, more broadly. So this is where I'm essentially going through these URLs and I'm making sure, "Hey, okay. I 
know I've targeted these keywords and I already did sort of my page title meta description. But let me check if there are other 
opportunities." Are there content opportunities or image search opportunities? Do I have rich snippet opportunities? Like maybe,
this is probably not the case, but I could have user review stars for my Rand's Animals website. I don't know if people particularly
love this lemur GIF versus that lemur GIF. But those can be set up on your site, and you can see the description of how to do that on
Google and Bing. They both have resources for that. The same is true for Twitter and Facebook, who offer cards so that you show up
correctly in there. If you're using OpenGraph, I believe that also will correctly work on LinkedIn and other services like that. So
those are great options.

5. Launch amplification & link outreach plan
So one of the things that we know about SEO is that you need links and engagement and those types of signals in order to rank well.
You're going to want to have a successful launch day and launch week and even a launch month. That means, asking the question in 
advance:
I. "Who will help amplify your launch and why? Why are they going to do this?"
If you can identify, "These people, I know they personally want to help out," or, "They are friends and family. I have business 
relationships with them. They're customers of mine. They're journalists who promised to cover this. They are bloggers who care a lot 
about this subject and need stuff to write about." Whatever it is, if you can identify those people, create a list, and start doing 
that direct outreach, that is certainly something that you should do. I would plan in advance for that, and I would warn folks of when
you were going to do that launch. That way, when launch day rolls around, you have some big, exciting news to announce. Two weeks after
you launch to say, "Hey, I launched a new website a couple weeks ago," you're no longer news. You're no longer quite as special, and 
therefore your chances of coverage go down pretty precipitously after the first few days.

II. "What existing relationships, profiles, and sites should I update to create buzz (and accuracy)?"
I would also ask what existing relationships and websites and profiles do you already have that you can and should update to create 
buzz and actually to create accuracy. So this would be things like everything from your email signature to all your social profiles 
that we've talked about, both the ones you've claimed and the ones that you personally have. You should go and update your LinkedIn. 
You should go and update your Twitter page. You should go and update Facebook. All of those kinds of things, you may want to go and 
update. About.me if you have a profile there, or if you're a designer, maybe your Dribbble profile, whatever you've got.
*Then, you should also be thinking about, "Do I have content that I've contributed across the web over the years, on all sorts of other
websites, where if I went and said, 'Hey, I've got a new site. Could you point to that new site, instead of my old one, or to my new 
site that I've just launched, instead of my old employer who I've left?'" you can do that as well, and it's certainly a good idea.

III. "What press coverage, social coverage, or influencer outreach can I do?"
The last thing I would ask about are people who are maybe more distant from you, but press coverage, social coverage, or influencer 
outreach, similar to the, "Who will help you amplify and why?" You should be able to make a list of those folks, those outlets, find 
some email addresses, send a pitch if you've got one, and start to build those relationships.
Launch day is a great reason to do outreach. When you're launching something new is the right time to do that, and that can help you 
get some amplification as well.



Friday April 7th, 2017
This week we're going to chat about how you can use your competitors' top pages, data from a number of reports, from a bunch of 
different tools about which pages are the most important, or highest ranked, or most linked to URLs on your competitors' websites, 
in order to boost your SEO efforts. There's a bunch of cool things that you can do with these, beyond the obvious.
5 kinds of "Top Pages" reports
So first off, there are really five kinds of top pages reports. These can be further filtered and augmented with data that you could 
craft or create, and some of these tools add in additional data too, so you could do other things with them. But basically, these five 
are:
1. Top pages by links
This is essentially what are the most linked to, either by URLs, or by root domains, or highest page authority, those kinds of things.
The three tools that have that are Moz, Ahrefs, and Majestic. They're the primary link tools out there on the web.

2. Top pages by social shares
This is looking at Facebook, LinkedIn, Google Plus, Twitter. Important caveat on this, Moz technically has top pages by social shares,
but only from Facebook and Google Plus. Probably we'll be replacing Google Plus with LinkedIn soon. Ahrefs has it, but same story. 
They don't have Twitter data. BuzzSumo are the only folks who can show you Twitter data, but they only have it if they've already
recorded the URL and started tracking it, because Twitter took away the ability to see Twitter share accounts for any particular URL, 
meaning that in order for BuzzSumo to actually get that data, they have to see that page, put it in their index, and then start
collecting the tweet counts on it. So it's not perfect data, but they're certainly the best source as far as social share numbers go.
You can also get some data from SharedCount.com, but it's been sort of up and down lately.

3. Top pages by estimated search traffic
So this is essentially where SEMrush shines. Ahrefs also has this. Basically, what they're doing is they're looking at, "Here all the
keywords that we've seen this URL or this path or this domain ranking for, and here is the estimated keyword volume." I think both
SEMrush and Ahrefs are scraping Google AdWords to collect their keyword volume data. Actually, I think maybe Ahrefs is also doing what
Moz does now, where they bolster that with data that they buy from Jumpshot or possibly another clickstream provider. So essentially 
they're saying, "These pages are the ones we think are getting the most organic search traffic." Super valuable report from both of 
those guys as well.

4. Top pages by number of ranking keywords
So this is different from estimated search traffic. There could be a page on a domain that only ranks for one keyword, but it gets 
tons of searches and it ranks number one, so it gets an incredible amount of search traffic. But there could be pages that rank for a
ton of different keywords, but they rank number 6 through 10, or they rank number 11 through 50, and they rank for all these different
numbers of keywords, but none of them particularly well or none of them all that awesome, and so they don't show up in the top estimated
search traffic reports. Again, SEMrush and Ahrefs provide those.

5. Top pages by total traffic
So this would be SimilarWeb and Jumpshot provide these. Alexa does too. I mean Alexa, not Amazon's voice search app, but the old Alexa 
rankings system. Why did they name them both the same thing? It makes it really confusing. Does it frustrate you? It frustrates me. So 
you can use SimilarWeb or Jumpshot to see the top pages by total traffic. So that's all sources, that's search traffic, social traffic,
direct, email, links, etc., etc.

Problems to solve/questions to answer
These five I'm going to reference as we dive into problems to solve and questions to answer.
A. What is my competition doing that's bringing them success along various vectors?
This is the most obvious one. This is the one that everybody uses the top pages reports for. So they go, "Okay, what is the most 
linked to? What has the most social shares?" Fine, so I can see what content has been most successful in any different one along any 
of those vectors. It's obvious, it's good to use, it can answer some questions, but check out these other ones.

B. Where has my competition created broad content, leaving gaps of specific queries I can fill?
Potentially fill with answer boxes, featured snippets, I could potentially fill by having a more targeted page that answers that query 
directly better, and so doesn't need as many links to rank, because it's very, very hyper-targeted? You can do that by looking at things
that your competition has done really well on number four, top pages by number of ranking keywords, but has not done as well with total 
organic estimated search traffic. The gap between those two will give you those kinds of content opportunities, hyper-focused content 
and keyword targeting opportunities, which is killer.

C. What content has done really well, like resonated with social or direct traffic audiences, but then it's done poorly in SEO?
So, for that, I can look at number two, top pages by social shares, or number five, by total traffic, but then look at ones that have 
performed poorly on number of keywords and estimated search traffic.

D. What content has helped my competitors grow their link profile, but may not be ranking or maybe it used to be ranking, but it's not 
ranking anymore because they haven't kept the content up to date? Maybe people were looking for stuff around 2017, and they created 
this content way back in 2015, and even though they got a bunch of links to it, it's just not ranking that well anymore. These are 
huge opportunities, and so you can look for number one being very high, high number of links, but lower number of ranking keywords and
estimated search traffic.

E. What content is low on links, but high on getting search traffic and getting lots of keywords ranking for it?
Which means that there's a strong opportunity that if you can out link build them, you can probably overtake them. Because if it's weak 
on number of links, but it's strong on estimated search traffic and number of ranking keywords, there's probably a golden opportunity.
So you can see how by mixing and matching these things and by comparing top pages data from multiple sources against one another, you 
can get some really cool, powerful, advanced SEO opportunities in your content and keyword targeting.
