Instruction
Common Table Expressions (CTEs), often simply called WITH clauses, are essentially just named subqueries. 
They are a fairly new feature of SQL; with CTEs, you can break a long query into smaller chunks, which makes it more readable. 
Unlike SQL subqueries, CTEs can be recursive, allowing the traversal of hierarchical models of enormous depth.

This course covers simple CTEs, nested CTEs, and recursive CTEs. 
You will learn how to manage your SQL queries with CTEs, how and when to nest CTEs, and how to use recursive CTEs to move through hierarchical data models.

In this first part of the course you will test your knowledge about basic SQL. 
You need fundamental SQL knowledge in order to follow this course, which covers more advanced material.
We assume that you know how to filter rows in the table, sort data, and use aggregate functions with GROUP BY and HAVING predicates. 
You will also need skills in joining tables and in using subqueries and set operators.
Check your knowledge: start with our short quiz to test your SQL skills!

Exercise
Click Next exercise to begin the review.

Solution
No solution needed



Instruction
We will start with very easy exercises.
But before you begin writing code, first look at the tables of data on which you will operate. 
On the right side of the screen, there is a button labeled Database – click on it to study the structure of the tables.
Some of us collect the recipes for our favorite meals. Our database stores a collection of recipes for a favorite meal.
The first table you will operate on is the recipe table. This table contains the set of recipes for various dishes (foods).

Exercise
Select all data from the recipe table. It has columns:

    id – identifier of the recipe,
    name – name of the recipe,
    difficulty – varying difficulty of making recipes from 1 to 3: 3 – indicates the most difficult, and 1, the least,
    cook_time – time in minutes to make the recipe.
    rating – number of points from 1 to 3 given by people as assessment of recipe: 3 – excellent, is the highest mark, and 1 – not so good, the lowest.

Solution
select * from recipe


Exercise
Select all columns from the table ingredient. This table includes:

    id – identifier the ingredient,
    name – name of the ingredient,
    type – type of the ingredient, such as fruit, vegetable, etc.

Solution
select * from recipe
