                     Bullet Proof Local SEO 
                     Course Notes Part 2


1.7 - Internal Linking
Internal links, meaning links that are on your site count just the same way that external links do, as far as Google is 
concerned. 
We know that when another site links to you that you get some sort of credit for it, but you, also, get credit when your site
internally links properly. 
There are different ways that you could utilize this technique but as usual, be cautious. The best way to do this technique 
is to start by making just a couple of changes. Let it sit for a couple of weeks. Make sure that there's no negative marks 
that come from it, and then if everything is great, move forward. 
Free 14 day trial available for crawling the site for SEO purposes used to demonstrate site crawling for links
  - https://netpeaksoftware.com/spider 
PR - Page Ranking 
This strategy is white hat, as long as you don't over optimize. It's very safe, and it actually, honestly, can be very, very
powerful. 
If you have a normal size local client site, then you are going to use about 1 or 2 per page
Also a quick demonstration of the SEO Internal Link Building plugin, adjustment of density is needed to avoid only linking
on one instance of the keyword


1.8 - Site Speed
There are over 200 factors that Google uses in order to rank a website.
There's many reasons why page speed is important, but the reason why it's important to help you rank is because Google knows
that pages that take longer to load than their average competitor are going to provide a poor experience for their user.
Google Developers PageSpeed Insights test - tool for analysing sites, the author recommend that you use Google's tool first.
Other tools available include GTMetrix
The author goes through a demo of Google Developers PageSpeed Insights test
There are two grade levels
  - Red which means that you should fix
  - Orange means its recommended that you fix
The test itself will give you instructions on how to repair issues but it maybe advisable to get a developer in if there is 
any doubt about what you are doing.
You may need to use caching programmes to increase site speed but make sure it doesn't cause conflicts
CDN - Content Delivery Network, instead of having dependencies stored locally a lot of site use CDN to reduce sizes 


1.9 - Site Security 1
Hacked in this context means access without authorisation
There are many different reasons for your site to be attacked and not all are malicious
Some hacks cannot be prevented eg Hosting being hacked
3 main reasons for site being hacked 
  - Weak Passwords
    - Always use strong passwords
    - Rename Admin account on Wordpress
    - Two Factor Authentication(Recommended for higher value sites)
    - Install security software eg Sucuri or Wordfence
  - Plugin Leaks
    - Keep plugins updated regularly
  - Themes
    - Use theme authenticity checker tool (author recommended)


1.10 - Site Security 2
What to do if your site is hacked
Firstly dont panic!!!
Login to CPanel and change passwords
Restore from a backup from before the attack(you may need to ask host)
Perform full scan of site for malware (may need site to be downloaded)
Do all the steps from the previous section again

