                    Complete Digital Marketing Course By Darragh Walsh
                    
                    
                    Section: 1 - Let's Jump Straight In!
1 - 12 Projects Overview + Access to Course Notes & Templates
Introduction to the instructor and the course
Each of the sections will build one upon the other
Get Instant Access to All the Course Notes, Tools & Templates

2 - 5 Best Free Digital Marketing Tools
5 free tools which will benefit your business
  - Keyword Everywhere browser extension
  - Similarweb.com, great for competitor analysis
  - Canva.com, graphic design tool
  - Vid IQ, youtube tool similar to similarweb but for videos
  - Google Analytics Custom Dashboard

5 Best Free Digital Marketing Tools

3 - Your First Challenge!



                    Section: 2 - Marketing Fundamentals
1 - Project: Create a Buyer Persona & Unique Selling Proposition
A buyer persona is a semi-fictional representation of your ideal customer based on market research and real data about your existing 
customers.
Unique selling proposition - This defines your position in the marketplace and lets you stand apart from competitors.
There is a template available for download which you will fill in with data concerning your own business 

Link provided to instructor site for Course Notes - Buyer Persona

2 - How to Create a Buyer Persona
This is the person you are creating your content, products or service for. They can’t wait for you to launch because you solve a 
problem they have!
Instead of focusing “target market” or something abstract., you humanise your marketing and make it real.
Developing a buyer persona results in stronger and more cost effective marketing.
It allows you to convey a more tailored message, minimise advertising waste and discover objections holding back customers.

Are there any tricks to developing a buyer persona? - Yes! Just look in the mirror.
If you have an idea for a business, more than likely it came from a frustrating experience you had. A problem you needed fixing. 
A solution that didn’t get the results or was just too hard to implement.
You may also have observed a pain point of someone you have close contact with.
It’s unlikely your buyer persona is someone you’ve never met before. How could you understand intimately what’s holding them back 
from achieving their goal?

3 - 8 Ways to Find Your Audience Online
Quora.com – see the most common questions for your niche.
Facebook Groups – review profiles of group members.
Online Marketplaces & Review Sites –Amazon, Yelp, Udemy, AppStore etc.
Typeform – ask what is your biggest fear / frustration with topic x.
Google Analytics – review demographic &  interest reports.
Facebook Analytics – review demographic reports.
YouTube Analytics – review demographic reports.
Just Ask! e.g. what you you want to achieve from this course (see lecture 3).

4 - How to Identify Your Unique Selling Proposition

5 - Recap & Taking Action



                  Section: 3 - Market Research
1 - Project: Validate Your Idea with Typeform

Link provided to instructor site for Course Note - Market Research

2 - Why Typeform?

3 - How to Design Your Online Survey

4 - How to Distribute Your Online Survey

5 - How to Analyse Your Survey Results

6 - Taking Action: Gather Priceless Feedback & Emails



                    Section: 4 - Wordpress
Complete course notes on wordpress available at 
 - https://github.com/marb61a/Course-Notes/blob/master/Wordpress/The%20Complete%20Wordpress%20Website%20Business%20Course
 - https://github.com/marb61a/Course-Notes/blob/master/Wordpress/WPFaster
 
1 - Project: Create a Wordpress Website in 1hr Without Any Technical Skills
 - Link provided to instructor site for Course Notes- Wordpress
2 - Why Wordpress?
3 - How to Choose a Domain Name
4 - Domain Registration & Hosting
5 - How to Install Wordpress
6 - How to Add Pages & Posts to Wordpress
7 - Google Analytics for Wordpress
8 - How to Choose & Install a Premium Theme
9 - Taking Action: Create Your Site in 5 Steps!

Plugin Used - Monsterinsights -- https://www.monsterinsights.com



                    Section: 5 - Email Marketing
1 - Project: Get Your First 1000 Email Subscribers in 30 Days
Introduction to the section
Leverage Mailchimp, Leadpages, Lead Magnets and the powerful email marketing strategies to grow your email list even faster.

2 - Why List Building Is So Important
Online experts agree that building an email list is vital
As well as effectively driving traffic & sales, an email list protects your business. 
You’ll still be able to promote your business even if your search rankings or social media reach diminish due to an algorithm change.
It does not matter if you aren’t selling any products, you should still collect emails so you can drive people back to your site
everytime you make a blog post.
Do not make the mistake of not building your list from the start!

3 - How to Integrate MailChimp with Wordpress
Mailchimp is email marketing solution to manage subscribers, send emails, and track results.
It’s one of the most popular email services and free up to 2000 subscribers.
3 steps are needed to add Mailchimp to Wordpress site
 - Set Up a Domain Specific Email Address inside your web hosting account. It helps you look more professional with customers, promotes 
   your website and company and will get stuck less in spam filters when you send out emails.
 - Create a Free Mailchimp Account. Set up an email list and import any email addresses you already have collected.
 - Add a Sign Up Form on Your Website. Create and style your email sign up form inside Mailchimp. Copy and paste the html code generated 
   back into your website.

4 - How to Track Email Sign Ups with Google Analytics

5 - How to Add a Lead Magnet to Your Sign Up Form

6 - How to Turn Your Homepage Into a Landing Page

7 - How to Use Pop Ups & Opt In Forms

8 - How to Use LeadPages to Grow Faster

9 - How to Create an Email Campaign in Mailchimp

10 - Email Analytics: 5 Metrics to Track

11 - Taking Action: Set Up Your Sign Forms & Incentives



                    Section: 6 Copywriting
1 - Project: Write Copy That Sells
Introduction to the section

2 - What is Copywriting & Why is it Important?
Copywriting is using written words to persuade people to take the action you want them to.
The major question then is How do you actually do that?
In nearly all cases it comes down to presenting an argument strong enough to convince visitors that what you’re going to provide them 
with is worth more than what they are giving you.
The main benefit of copywriting is that it increases sales!
It is easier to double your conversion rate with better copy than double traffic rates
Doubling your conversion rate from 1% to 2% is much easier with good sales copy
Many different activities benefit from copywriting
 - Market Research -- Explain the benefits of people completing your survey.
 - Email Marketing --Writing subject lines that people will open.
 - Search Engine Optimization -- Creating SEO optimised content.
 - YouTube -- Writing video headlines and scripts.
 - Facebook & Twitter -- Creating post people will engage with.
 - Quora -- Writing answers that get upvoted.
 - Google Adwords --Writing effective ads.

3 - How to Write For Your Buyer Persona

4 - Attention - Headlines are "Eighty Cents of the Dollar"

5 - 11 Tips to Write Magnetic Headlines

6 - A.I.D.A - Interest, Desire & Action
Full discussion on how tow use AIDA model on websites available here
 - https://github.com/marb61a/Course-Notes/blob/master/Design/Landing%20Page%20Design%20%26%20Web%20Design%20Fundamentals

7 - Taking Action: Use A.I.D.A to Write Copy That Sells



                    Section: 7 - Search Engine Optimization (SEO)
Comprehensive SEO Notes available at -
 - https://github.com/marb61a/Course-Notes/tree/master/Marketing/MOZ
 - https://github.com/marb61a/Course-Notes/tree/master/Marketing/BPLSEO

1 - Project: Complete this 26-Point SEO Checklist
 Course Notes - SEO
2 - An Overview of SEO
3 - 5 SEO Metrics to Measure SEO Performance
4 - How to SEO Optimise Your Homepage
5 - How to Verify Your Website in The Google Search Console
6 - How to Improve Website Performance & Speed
7 - How to Take the Google Mobile Friendly Test
8 - How to Do Keyword Research: Steps & Strategy
9 - How to Quickly Brainstorm 1000's of Keyword Ideas
10 - How to Narrow Down Your Keyword List using Google Keyword Planner
11 - How to Assess Keyword Competition & Choose Target Keywords
12 - How to Write Title Tags Search Engines Love
13 - How to Skyrocket Clickthrough Rate with Meta Descriptions
14 - How to Appear in the Google Image Search Results
15 - Copy Optimization: Headings Tags, Outgoing & Internal Links etc.
16 - The Types of Backlinks That Really Matter and How to Get Them
17 - How to Maximise Links for Your SEO Campaigns
18 - How to Create Content That Generates Links & Social Shares on Autopilot
19 - How to Leverage Authority Websites and Top of the Search Results
20 - Student Q&A #1
21 - Student Q&A #2
22 - Local SEO: How to Rank Your Local Business in Google
23 - Taking Action: Follow the 26 Point SEO Checklist!



                    Section: 8 - YouTube Marketing
1 - Project: Use Simple Videos to Drive Traffic & Sales
An overview of what the chapter will cover
A link to the pdf provided covering section notes
Project is to create and upload your own video

2 - Why YouTube
 - Youtube is the world’s 3rd most-visited website!
 - YouTube is the world’s second biggest search engine (just behind Google).
 - Cisco predicts that 80% of all Internet traffic will be video content by 2019
 - Everyone is watching YouTube.
 - You can no longer afford to ignore video marketing. It’s a core competency within marketing.
 - It’s easy to get started.

3 - YouTube Marketing Strategy
 - Create simple “how to” videos that “engage” your buyer persona.
 - Focus on searchability and discoverability i.e. keyword research + SEO optimization.
 - Build up audience on the platform and funnel back to website with incentives & offers.
 
Note: If you want become a famous vlogger, gamer or YouTube viral sensation, then this strategy should be adjusted.

4 - "Watch Time" is Golden
 - Watch Time is the most important metric on YouTube.
 - Before, number of “views” on a video drove it’s discoverability and rank.
 - Now, YouTube suggests videos in search and recommendations based on “watch time”. Put simply, YouTube will your promote videos if
   they keep users engaged.
 - This metric is key to the success of your YouTube marketing strategy. Keep it in mind as you go through the next steps.

5 - The Subscriber Advantage
Subscribers are critical to your success on YouTube:
 - Subscriber help you get you those critical initial views as soon as you post a video.
 - Subscribers watch more than anyone else. Remember ‘Watch Time” is golden.
 
How to Increase YouTube Subscribers
 - Set a goal to for your channel subscribers: 100,1000,10,000, 1M or 10M!
 - Increase subscribers numbers with call to action at the end of videos.

Bonus: Simple Trick to Increase YouTube Subscribers by 400%. 
Prompt your users to subscribe to your channel when you mention your YouTube channel in emails, link to YouTube from your website or
any social media profile.
Just add this small parameter (?sub_confirmation=1) at the end of your channel URL to show this popup 
 - https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQz2VpIRSApVqoZ_wDt5sfg?sub_confirmation=1
Note, this particular trick will only work on user pages or channel pages, not on links for individual videos.

6 - YouTube Recording Software & Mics
The instructor makes certain recommendations for equipment to be used for making Youtube Videos

Recording Software (screen + camera)
 - Budget: Screencastomatic – free with watermark. $15/year premium
 - Professional: Camtasia – $99 on mac
 
Microphones:
 - Budget: Samsung Go Mic USB Microphone $40
 - Professional: Blue Yeti USB Microphone $129
 
YouTube Video Manager
 - Make changes to uploaded videos: Add annotations, cards, subtitles, closed captions and more.

7 - YouTube Acccount Set Up & Optimization
Some steps to be followed hen setting up Youtube account
Essentials:
 - Create a channel with a business or other name.
 - Add a Channel Icon
 - Associate Your Website. Required so you can link back to your site inside your videos. 
   -> Go to: https://www.youtube.com/advanced_settings

Optional:
 - Link to Adwords Accounts
 - Link to Google Analytics (analytics for channel page only)
 - YouTube Channel Art (Use Canva.com for banner templates & sizes)

8 - YouTube Keyword Research
3 keyword research tools to find untapped video keywords:
 - YouTube’s Autocomplete Feature. (use private browsing so your search history doesn’t skew the suggestions)
 - Keyword Everywhere Chrome Extension
 - Google Keyword Planner

9 - YouTube Video Structure
*** Remember “watch time” is golden.

Search on Youtube yourself for ideas on what other people are searching for.

Follow this sequence exactly to maximise audience retention
 - Headline. Keyword Optimised. Show benefits compared to other videos in the search results.
 - Problem. The first 30 seconds is the most important. Identify the problem you will solve and visual stimuli to keep people interested.
 - Solution: The core of your video is the educational segment which provides the solution to the problem outlined.
 - Call To Action (CTA). End with a strong CTA, either to subscribe like comment or link back to your website. Use annotations, cards 
   and end templates.

10 - YouTube SEO
Key points to follow when you upload your video:
 - File name -- Include your target keyword e.g. seo-tutorial-for-beginners.mp4
 - Title -- Include your target keywords at the start of your title. Highlight benefits compared to other videos.
 - Description -- Summarise the content of your video in 200 words. Include keywords 3-4 times.
 - Video Tags -- Include your keyword as the first tag and a few related keywords as tags.
 - Closed Captioning -- Great for non native speakers, search, user experience and mobile viewers in sound sensitive environments.

11 - Youtube Thumbnails
Steps to create thumbnails:
 - Use custom thumbnails to stand out in the search results. 
 - Use solid background colors to catch viewers’ eye.
 - Add text -- Many viewers look at a thumbnail before they read the actual text title.
 - Thumbnail Size -- 1280px * 720 px. Make sure it looks good when it’s sized down.
 - Youtube Thumbnail Maker -- Use free templates in Canva.com

12 - YouTube Annotations & Cards
Add cards and annotations to uploaded videos inside the YouTube Video Manager.
Use these to add 
 - text notes
 - promote a video or playlist
 - add links an approved website
 - promote another channel etc.

Cards - Allow viewers to click on CTA a mobile device (annotations don’t allow this). Teaser text appears in upper right corner of 
        the video for five seconds then reverts to “i” icon. Easily add images to videos without editing software. Limited to 5 per video

Annotations - Allows for flexible “spotlights” and pop-up locations. Can be any size and many colour schemes. However, they are not 
              mobile friendly and YouTube plans to phase this feature out.

13 - YouTube Promotion
5 Ways to Promote Your Video to Get Initial Views
 - Promote to email list.
 - Embed Video in Blog Posts (embed at certain time).
 - Embed in Quora Answers.
 - Share in relevant Facebook groups.
 - Share short clip on Instagram, Snapchat, Vine, Twitter and link back to YouTube.

14 - YouTube Analytics
5 YouTube Metrics to Measure Video Performance:
 - Watch Time: Watch time is your key metric rather than video views.
 - Subscriptions Driven: Subscribers watch more than anyone else.
 - Engagement: Shares, comments, likes.
 - Audience Retention: See exactly where viewers dropped off.
 - Traffic Sources: Shows  how viewers find your content (sites and YouTube features)

Get additional insights Use Vid IQ Chrome Extension to see what the top creators are doing .

15 - Taking Action: Upload Your First Video



                    Section: 9 - Facebook Marketing
1 - Project: Get Your First 1000 Likes Without Facebook Ads
Introduction to the section & Overview of what will be covered

2 - Why Facebook?
3 reasons why Facebook is important for your business:
 - Over 1.5 billion people spend time sharing the most important parts of their lives on Facebook and this is where businesses can 
   engage them in conversation.
 - Average Facebook user has 200 Friends. This social network enables a viral marketing effect that can grow your customer base much 
   faster than traditional marketing.
 - Gather valuable marketing information. Use Facebook Insights to dig deeper into your fan base and create a detailed buyer persona. 
   Info like demographic breakdowns and what specifically fans are interested are more readily available and accurate on Facebook than 
   on YouTube, Google Analytics etc.

3 - Create Your Facebook Page
How to create your FB page
Get started at www.facebook.com/pages/create
Page Type has  six options, most small businesses will only need to use two
 - “Company, Organization, or Institution”
 - “Local Business or Place.”
Page Category: Choose the appropriate category for your business.
Page Name & Username: Enter your business or brand name (& skip remaining steps)

4 - Facebook Icon
Author recommends using Canva to create icons
Use a simple logo or symbolic representation of your business. 
Optimal size: 540 x 540 pixels.

5 - Facebook Cover Image
This is prime real estate so make full use of it. 
It can be change for seasonal events or to drive call to actions. 
Again yoy can get Sizes & Templates at Canva.com.

6 - Description & About Page
Add in the “about” section on your page. 
Don’t sell, interact and connect. 
Include specific keywords and a call to action.

7 - Apps & Tabs
Cross promote other social media, 
 - Collect email sign ups
 - Display blog posts
 - Run competitions 
 - Customer support
 - Sell your products.

8 - Page Settings
There are no right or wrong settings. 
Should be based on your personal needs.

9 - 9 Post Formulas Gauranteed to Drive Engagement
Give people a reason to like your page. 
 - Show the value and type of posts they can expect to receive in future.
Supercharge your brand’s social word-of-mouth. 
 - Every comment, “like,” and share you receive is another opportunity to reach a new audience.

10 - Edgerank Algorithm
A large amount of content on Facebook, it has a filtering system called EdgeRank 
 - Limits the content people see in their newsfeed.
You need to be strategic about your posts. 
Three main factors
 - Affinity
 - Weight
 - Time Decay
Edgerank is not used anymore
Use the post formulas below to creates posts that people will want to share with their friends.

11 - Caption This Photo
Is a fun and simple post and is mostly visual
The only text needed it “Caption this!”
Share from sites such as - http://imgur.com

12 - Quotes
People love to share & Like quotes
2 main types of quotes 
 - Motivational
 - Whimsical
Post a quote as text or as a photo update
Use sites such as Pinterest to find pictures or quotes

13 - Native Videos
Facebook loves videos, especiall when uploaded directly to Face book
Videos can be used to 
 - Discuss new topics
 - Summarise a blog post 
 - Welcome people to your page. 
 - Reiterate call to actions in the post text.

14 - Facebook Contest
Contests give people an incentive to share
Sites such as 
 - https://www.wishpond.com/social-promotions/
 - https://gleam.io/facebook
Alternatively you can simply ask people to compete an action on a post
Be sure to include details about the prize and closing date!

15 - 5 More Facebook Post Formulas
Questions - Questions are a great way to spark dialogue with fans. It is probably the easiest way and one of the best methods to get 
            people to respond to your posts. 
Fill-in-the-Blanks. e.g. “If I had an unlimited marketing budget, I would ________”
Crowdsource For Answers - Instead of answering questions by yourself, why not get your fans to help others who are in need of tips and 
            advice. Simply, update your page with questions from fans.
Remember when - Nostalgia is a great way to engage people. Use simple texts posts or images to give people an opportunity to comment 
            about their memories from that time period 
Repost Your Popular Content - Share your Blog posts, Youtube Videos, Quora Answers, Instagram pics etc. that have already been successful
            on other platforms.

16 - Bonus Tips: Content Strategy
Like Similar Pages - Fill your newsfeed with competitors posts so you can see what types of post are getting engagement.
Pin Posts - Give important posts more exposure. It’s great for competitions or posts you want many people to see.
Best Time to Post - After you have made several posts, review Facebook insights to see the the best time to post to maximise engagement.

17 - 10 Tactics to Start Getting Organic Likes
Invite your Facebook friends on your personal profile to like the business page.
Add business page as a workplace on your personal profile.
Ask employees to business page as a workplace.
Share page on your personal profile 

18 - Use Email to Drive Organic Likes
Add a link to email signatures.
Add link to Mailchimp emails.
Invite Gmail contacts to like your page
Invite Linkedin contacts to like your page 
Invite email subscribers to like your page via Mailchimp or email provider.

19 - Use Facebook Groups to Drive Organic Likes
Join 5 relevant groups. 
Comment as your personal profile. 
Like and comment on big threads
Share links to your relevant business Facebook posts.

20 - Add a Facebook Like Box to Your Website
Get code by entering page url - https://developers.facebook.com/docs/plugins/page-plugin 
Add to sidebar, contact us or thank you page.

21 - Secret Strategy to Increase Page Likes
Invite people who have liked your post to like your page
This can be very effective if a post has had a large engagement

22 - 5 Facebook Insights Reports to Measure Success
Author suggests you think of Facebook Insights as
Likes - Reveals the total number of people who have liked your page within a specific time range and also where the like happened 
        (whether on page, page suggestions, mobile, desktop, etc.) You can also see a breakdown of paid vs. organic likes, as well as
        how many people unliked your page.
Reach - This is an important metric because it tells you how many people have seen your posts. You can also see some positive engagement
        metrics, such as likes, comments, and shares.
Posts - Analyzes your content based on post type, targeting, total reach, time of day, and engagement.
Visits - Gives you a breakdown of which pages were visited and also which referring sites brought people to your Facebook page.
People - Shows you the demographics of your fan base. 

23 - Taking Action: Get Your First 1000 Facebook Likes
Practical Action step for individual webpage
Recap of major points from the section



                    Section: 10 - Twitter Marketing
1 - Project: Increase Your Twitter Followers with 10 Strategies

2 - Why Twitter?

3 - How Twitter Works

4 - What Not To Do

5 - 4 Ways To Get More Retweets

6 - 5 Steps Optimize Your Profile

7 - 5 Ways to Promote Your Twitter

8 - Use Hastags to Increase Discoverability

9 - Follow Top Twitter Users

10 - The Poster Boy Formula

11 - Join a Trending Conversation

12 - Ask Questions

13 - Bring Twitter Into the Physical World

14 - Track Results: Twitter Analytics

15 - Bonus Tip. Schedule Tweets with Buffer

16 - Taking Action: Implement Strategies to Increase Twitter Followers



                    Section: 11 - Quora Marketing
1 - Project: Become an Authority & Drive Long Term Website Traffic

Course Notes - Quora

2 - Why Quora?

3 - How to Join Quora & Optimize Your Profile

4 - How to Identify Questions That Are Worth Answering

5 - How to Choose or Create a Blog Post to Link Back To

6 - How to Structure Your Answers For Maximum Clicks

7 - How to Promote Your Quora Answers

8 - How to Track Quora Traffic & ROI in Google Analytics

9 - Rinse & Repeat [Just 5 Mins a Day!]

10 - Taking Action: Promote Your Quora Answers



                    Section: 12 - Google Adwords
1 - Project: Create Your First Profitable Adwords Campaign

Course Notes - Google Adwords

2 - Benefits of Google Adwords

3 - How Google Adwords Works

4 - Define Success & Set Up Tracking

5 - Analyse Your PPC Competition

6 - Have a Congruent Landing Page

7 - Select The Right Campaign Type

8 - Target Your Audience

9 - Determine Your Bids & Budgets

10 - Write Effective Ads

11 - Choose Profitable Keywords

12 - Advanced Campaign Settings

13 - Measure & Optimise

14 - Taking Action: Create Your First Profitable Campaign



                    Section: 13 - Google Analytics
1 - Project: Take a Data Driven Approach to Growth

Google Analytics Audit Checklist

2 - Install Google Analytics

3 - Enable These 3 Essential Reports

4 - Set up Goal Tracking to Measure Success

5 - Filter Internal Traffic So You Don't Skew Your Data

6 - Add Custom Dashboard to Reveal 12 Essential Metrics

7 - Get Notified for Traffic Drops & Spikes with Custom Alerts

8 - Make Google Analytics Annotations So You Don't Forget

9 - Analyze Demographics Reports (Age, Gender, Interests & Behaviour)

10 - Analyze Geo Report (Language & Location)

11 - Analyze Technology & Mobile Report (Browser, OS & Devices)

12 - Analyze Acquisition Overview Report

13 - Analyze Source/Medium Report

14 - Analyze Best Days to Post

15 - Use Campaign Tagging to Improve Acquisition Data Accuracy

16 - Analyze Landing Pages Report

17 - Analyze All Pages Report

18 - Analyze Exit Pages Report

19 - Analyze Goals Report

20 - Taking Action: How to Decide Which Insights to Prioritse

21 - Bonus: How to Remove Spam Traffic



                    Section: 14 - Conclusion
1 - You've Done It! ...12 Key Takeaways from This Course

2 - How to Get Your Certificate of Completition
