                    Complete Facebook Ads & Marketing 2017 Course
                    
                    
                    
                    Section: 1 - Welcome! See The Best Of What I Have Learned And Implemented!
1 - PROOF: See the amazing power of Facebook Marketing here!
Introduction to the course and the author
A quick demonstration of the author's own online business
Instructor uses
 - Facebook
 - Youtube
The course will consist of a demonstration of how he built his business

2 - You Have To Test, Test and More Test!
Facebook has 1.7 billion users which are potential customers
Facebook allows you to set up your audience
A quick overview of Facebook ads manager
You need to get the people most likely to buy to see your advert
Facebook has muliple controls for allowing much more targeted ads

3 - How To Build A Profitable Business When You Create The Ideal Ad!
The author recommends combining Facebook ads with videos as being the very best method for generating
both traffic and sales.
There will be a full section in the course on this methodologies
The author has made sales from this methodology

4 - My Most Powerful Facebook Advertising Strategy For Growth and Results!
You will need to invest properly in advertising.
Discussion of the authors promotional strategy which will be fully discussed later in the course

5 - The Most Effective Free Facebook Marketing Strategy You Can Use Now!

6 - My Powerhouse Video Strategy That Enables The Lowest Ad Prices On Facebook

7 - If You're Looking For Sales, Branding and High Quality Likes, Watch This!

8 - The Best Way To Get Sales Using Facebook Live And Facebook Ads



                    Section: 2 - Introduction To Facebook Marketing! Learn The Basics And Get Started
1 - Welcome to the Facebook marketing for beginners section.
Very quick introduction to the section

2 - What is a Facebook profile?
A personal profile is your Facebook ID
Normally personal information
You can add life events
Timestamps are available 
You can allow certain people to see certain posts

3 - How do you make a good Facebook profile?
A good profile
 - Is complete
 - Updated statuses
 - Has full bio details
 - Incomplete FB profile may be regarded as fake

4 - Where do most users on Facebook spend their time? In the newsfeed. What is it?
Most people spend their FB time on their timeline
Ads will appeaar on the timeline
You & your business will need to appear on peoples timeline

5 - What is a Facebook page and how can you use it? How do people interact with it?
A FB page is a
 - Brand\Persona
 - Where you keep people up to date with professional info
 - Similar to profiles but for business info
 - Have good logo\banner
 - Ensure that your page grabs people

6 - What is a Facebook group?

7 - What is an event on Facebook and how can you use events?

8 - What is a Facebook Ad?



                    Section: 3 - Facebook Ads For Beginners
1 - Welcome To This Section On Facebook Ads

2 - How To Access The Facebook Ads Manager

3 - How To Navigate the Facebook Ads Manager

4 - Page post engagement is the objective that performs the best for me.

5 - How to Build an Audience from Scratch!

6 - How to Clone a Successful Audience & Find your Mailing List on Facebook

7 - Build an audience that is x30 more likely to interact with you

8 - How to Boost your Posts like a Boss!

9 - Run an Effective "Likes" Campaign!

10 - Basic Overview Of The Different Types Of Facebook Ad - September 2016

12 - What is your purpose of advertising on Facebook?

13 - Live Tutorial: Putting Effort Into Your Facebook Ads Gets The Best Results!

14 - Patience and experimentation will lead to success with Facebook Ads



                    Section: 4 - Facebook Pages - Strategies For Success.
1 - The Secret To Dominating Facebook Marketing And Facebook Ads!

2 - Which to use? Facebook pages, Facebook groups, and/or a Facebook profile?

3 - What Kind of Facebook Page Do You Want To Create?

4 - What type of Facebook Page should you create? And why?

5 - How To Create A Facebook Page For Yourself

6 - How many Facebook Pages can you create? See what I've done with mine



                    Section: 5 - Facebook Marketing functions and Success Strategies
1 - How to build a great Facebook page using engaging videos regularly

2 - How To Create And Launch A Facebook Group Effectively

3 - How Do You Create An Event on Facebook?

4 - How To Delete A Facebook Page

5 - What would you be willing to work on every day for free?



                    Section: 6 - $0.004 Per Page Like - How To Get 100,000+ Page Likes With One Ad
1 - Facebook Likes provide Social Proof and Virality for your page to succeed!

2 - See Proof Of My Amazing Facebook Ads Results

3 - Exact Method: How To Get Facebook Page Likes for $0.004

4 - Watch Live As I Create The Perfect Facebook Ad - Replicate This For Success!

5 - How To Get $0.00 Cost For Page Likes



                    Section: 7 - $0.0003 Page Post Engagement - How To Create Viral Videos
1 - See My Proof Of Joining The Exclusive 3 Zero Club - $0.0002 per view!

2 - This Is The Exact Formula For Getting Into The 3 Zero Club!

3 - The Formula For Three Zero Club Success!

4 - Watch Me Find A Viral Video That Can Be Posted For Guaranteed Results!

5 - The Do's and Don'ts of Posting Viral Videos - Get This Right!

6 - The Effective Way To Create A Viral Facebook Post And How To Advertise It!

7 - Three Zero Club Achieved In Just 1 Hour!! Live Proof The Formula Works!

8 - Monetisation - This Is Where 0.000 Ads Work Their Magic!!

9 - Getting in the Three Zero Zone Within A Niche Area



                    Section: 8 - $0.00 US & UK Post Engagement Ad That Makes Sales & Profit
1 - How Targeted High Cost Countries Makes A Profit For Me

2 - How You Need To Scale Up Ads That Are Making A Profit

3 - Deeper Analysis Into Why This Ad Is Successful And Profitable!

4 - The Smart Way to Scale Up When Ads Start To Work

5 - Exact Method: Get $0.00 Page Post Engagement Ads That Make You a Profit



                    Section: 9 - Remarketing - The Art Of Selling To Warmer Prospects
1 - Introduction to Remarketing - What is it? And Why is it valuable?

2 - Remarketing - How to get your content in front of all your Page fans

3 - Remarketing to the audience that are proven to buy your product



                    Section: 10 - Analyse your Facebook ads to find what is working best!
1 - Introduction To Facebook Ad Analytics

2 - See how to use the reporting features in Facebook ads to measure your ROI.

3 - Create Custom Facebook Ad Reports For Deeper Insights Into What Is Working.

4 - How To Export Data From Facebook For Reporting Purposes

5 - Comparing Facebook Ad Sets Helps You Improve Results And Keep Costs Lower

6 - How To Create A New Facebook Ad Set To Assist With Sales Generation



                    Section: 11 - Facebook Live - The Best Organic Reach Tool Online
1 - Facebook Live - The Best Free Organic Reach Strategy On The Internet

2 - How To Start Facebook Live Streaming

3 - How To Live Stream From Your Desktop Computer Using Free Broadcasting Software!

4 - Adding Titles, Tags & URL Links To Optimise Your Live Stream On OBS!



                    Section: 12 - How To Reach 1,000,000 People Daily With Facebook Live
1 - The Secret Strategy To Getting 1,000,000 People Reached A Day!

2 - Another Way To Use The Secret Facebook Live Strategy!

3 - Exact Method: How You Can Get Visibility To Your Target Audience!

4 - Why Entertaining Your Audience Is Key To Dominating Facebook Live!

5 - Be The News With Facebook Live and Go Viral!



                    Section: 13 - How To Make Epic Live Streams That Stand Out!
1 - How To Draw & Add Video Filters On Facebook Live!

2 - New Face Filters For Facebook Live - Perfect for Engaging Young Audiences!

3 - Showing You How to Go Facebook Live With MSQRD's Face Filters!



                    Section: 14 - Facebook Live Strategies For Groups and Profiles
1 - How To Appear in Front of Thousands By Posting on Groups!

2 - How Facebook Live Can Revolutionise Your Personal Profile on Facebook!

3 - Set Your Privacy Settings So You Can Decide Who Sees Your Facebook Live Stream!



                    Section: 15 - Facebook Live Is The Best Video Type On Facebook
1 - Facebook Live Secret - Why Live Video Is Better than Normal Video!

2 - How to Go Live Even If You Don't Have a Product To Sell or Any Ideas

3 - 15 Stream Ideas That Could Make You a Star On Facebook Live

4 - Test, Test and Test To Make Your Presenting and Streams The Best On FB Live!



                    Section: 16 - Facebook Live Optimisation Strategies
1 - How To Schedule Your Facebook Live Stream So You Get Viewers!

2 - Use Page Insights To Know When To Go Live and Who You are Streaming To

3 - AIDA - Writing a Compelling Headline That Generates Attention and Interest!

4 - Adding A Thumbnail That Attracts Viewers To Your Live Stream - Top Secret!

5 - How long should your Facebook Live stream be?

6 - What ‘Call to actions’ should you ask for during streams



                    Section: 17 - Watch Me Do An Entertaining Live Stream With Facebook Live!
1 - My Full Live Stream will show you exactly how you should be going Live

2 - Part 1 - How To Live Stream Like a Pro on Facebook Live

3 - Part 2 - How To Live Stream Like a Pro on Facebook Live

4 - Part 3 - How To Live Stream Like a Pro on Facebook Live

5 - Part 4 - How To Live Stream Like a Pro on Facebook Live



                    Section: 18 - Using Facebook Ads For Instagram
1 - How to Promote an Instagram Post using Facebook Ads - NEW

2 - Results of the Page Post Engagement on an Instagram Ad! Prepared to be WOWed!



                    Section: 19 - Practice these principles to guarantee success with Facebook Marketing & Ads
1 - Facebook Ads: Do What Works With You

2 - Offer Value Straight Away To Get Success With Facebook Marketing

3 - Focus on Cost Per Action (CPA) In Order To Maximise Results With Facebook Ads

4 - How The 80 / 20 Principle Will Put You In the Top Facebook Ads Performers

5 - The Four Key Principles That Lead To Success On Facebook



                    Section: 20 - How To Use And Create Facebook Audiences For Your Facebook Ads
1 - Introduction to audiences in Facebook ads.
Quick introduction to the section and what it will cover

2 - Facebook ads audience types: custom, lookalike, and saved.

3 - Customer list custom audience creation in Facebook advertising.

4 - Website traffic custom audience creation for remarketing.

5 - Custom app audience

6 - Custom Audience Through Video Viewers

7 - Creating a lookalike audience.

8 - How to make a saved audience to speed up targeting with Facebook ads.

9 - Facebook Ad Country List For Highest & Lowest Cost Ads On Facebook



                    Section: 21 - Course Summary: Using Facebook Ads In The Future
1 - Congratulations On Completing The Facebook Ads & Marketing Course
Final lecture in the course, a quick few words from the author


                    Section: 22 - Bonus Material: Retired Lectures!
These lectures have been retired and will be removed
1 - Thank you for joining me! What Am I Going To Be Teaching You Today?
2 - Pushing Ads To Your Target Audience Is The Key To Success On Facebook
3 - How To Create A Facebook Ad - Learn How To Target a Specific Audience!
4 - How To Decide The Ad Budget So Facebook Delivers The Best Results
5 - Facebook ads interface basics September 2016



                    Section: 23 - Continue Learning Social Media With Me On Udemy!
1 - Bonus lecture: How to get more courses with me for only $10
Links to coupons for the course authors other courses
