Exercise
Create a view current_course_lecturer which will show the name and description of all current courses with the first and last name of their lecturers. 
Use the view current_course and the ERD below to help you.

Solution
CREATE VIEW current_course_lecturer AS
SELECT
	cc.name,
    cc.description,
    l.first_name,
    l.last_name
FROM current_course cc
JOIN lecturer l
ON cc.lecturer_id = l.id


Instruction
Okay, one last thing you need to know: views can be deleted. When you delete a view, you only delete the remembered query. 
The data or the table itself are not deleted in this way. Take a look:

DROP VIEW current_course;

The above instruction will delete the view current_course.

Exercise
Delete the view current_lecturer.

Solution
DROP VIEW current_lecturer


Exercise
In the table product, there are the following columns: id, name, category, price.
Create a view called tablet which will select all columns for only those products which belong to the category tablet. 

Solution
CREATE VIEW tablet AS
SELECT * 
FROM product 
WHERE category = 'tablet'


Exercise
Delete the view tablet.

Solution
DROP VIEW tablet


Exercise
A local publishing house organizes a competition for the best short story. They need a table to store information about the entries they get.
Create a table entry with the following columns:

    id an integer number,
    title - a text of up to 250 characters,
    date_submitted - date & time when the entry was submitted,
    category - a code of exactly 5 characters,
    summary - a longer text field,
    is_anonymous - a yes/no field used to determine whether the author wants to be anonymous.

The column id is the primary key.

Solution
CREATE TABLE entry(
	id INT PRIMARY KEY,
  	title VARCHAR(250),
  	date_submitted TIMESTAMP,
  	category CHAR(5),
  	summary TEXT,
  	is_anonymous BOOL
)


Exercise
A wine connoisseur asked us to create a table so that he can keep track of his wine bottles. Write the proper SQL for the table below.

Solution
CREATE TABLE wine(
	id INT PRIMARY KEY,
  	name VARCHAR(64),
  	region VARCHAR(64),
  	grape VARCHAR(64),
  	year INT,
  	price DECIMAL(6, 2),
  	purchased DATE
)


Exercise
Do you still remember how to delete a table? Try to delete the table wine you have just created.

Solution
DROP TABLE wine


Exercise
A small healthcare unit wants to have a table with treatment options. 
The treatment offers are based on the International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems.
Create a table called treatment with the following columns:
    name - a text of up to 100 characters,
    disease_chapter - a text of up to 4 characters,
    disease_block - a three-letter code,
    price - a decimal number with up to 6 digits, two of which are after the decimal point.

The columns: name, disease_chapter, disease_block form the primary key. If no price is provided, the default value should be 0.00. 

Solution
CREATE TABLE treatment(
	name VARCHAR(100),
  	disease_chapter VARCHAR(4),
  	disease_block CHAR(3),
  	price DECIMAL(6, 2) DEFAULT 0.00,
  	PRIMARY KEY(name, disease_chapter, disease_block)
)
