                    Complete Digital Marketing Course 
                    Course Notes Part 5


8 - YouTube Keyword Research
3 keyword research tools to find untapped video keywords:
 - YouTube’s Autocomplete Feature. (use private browsing so your search history doesn’t skew the suggestions)
 - Keyword Everywhere Chrome Extension
 - Google Keyword Planner

9 - YouTube Video Structure
*** Remember “watch time” is golden.

Search on Youtube yourself for ideas on what other people are searching for.

Follow this sequence exactly to maximise audience retention
 - Headline. Keyword Optimised. Show benefits compared to other videos in the search results.
 - Problem. The first 30 seconds is the most important. Identify the problem you will solve and visual stimuli to keep people interested.
 - Solution: The core of your video is the educational segment which provides the solution to the problem outlined.
 - Call To Action (CTA). End with a strong CTA, either to subscribe like comment or link back to your website. Use annotations, cards 
   and end templates.

10 - YouTube SEO
Key points to follow when you upload your video:
 - File name -- Include your target keyword e.g. seo-tutorial-for-beginners.mp4
 - Title -- Include your target keywords at the start of your title. Highlight benefits compared to other videos.
 - Description -- Summarise the content of your video in 200 words. Include keywords 3-4 times.
 - Video Tags -- Include your keyword as the first tag and a few related keywords as tags.
 - Closed Captioning -- Great for non native speakers, search, user experience and mobile viewers in sound sensitive environments.

11 - Youtube Thumbnails
Steps to create thumbnails:
 - Use custom thumbnails to stand out in the search results. 
 - Use solid background colors to catch viewers’ eye.
 - Add text -- Many viewers look at a thumbnail before they read the actual text title.
 - Thumbnail Size -- 1280px * 720 px. Make sure it looks good when it’s sized down.
 - Youtube Thumbnail Maker -- Use free templates in Canva.com

12 - YouTube Annotations & Cards
Add cards and annotations to uploaded videos inside the YouTube Video Manager.
Use these to add 
 - text notes
 - promote a video or playlist
 - add links an approved website
 - promote another channel etc.

Cards - Allow viewers to click on CTA a mobile device (annotations don’t allow this). Teaser text appears in upper right corner of 
        the video for five seconds then reverts to “i” icon. Easily add images to videos without editing software. Limited to 5 per video

Annotations - Allows for flexible “spotlights” and pop-up locations. Can be any size and many colour schemes. However, they are not 
              mobile friendly and YouTube plans to phase this feature out.

13 - YouTube Promotion
5 Ways to Promote Your Video to Get Initial Views
 - Promote to email list.
 - Embed Video in Blog Posts (embed at certain time).
 - Embed in Quora Answers.
 - Share in relevant Facebook groups.
 - Share short clip on Instagram, Snapchat, Vine, Twitter and link back to YouTube.

14 - YouTube Analytics
5 YouTube Metrics to Measure Video Performance:
 - Watch Time: Watch time is your key metric rather than video views.
 - Subscriptions Driven: Subscribers watch more than anyone else.
 - Engagement: Shares, comments, likes.
 - Audience Retention: See exactly where viewers dropped off.
 - Traffic Sources: Shows  how viewers find your content (sites and YouTube features)

Get additional insights Use Vid IQ Chrome Extension to see what the top creators are doing .

15 - Taking Action: Upload Your First Video



                    Section: 9 - Facebook Marketing
1 - Project: Get Your First 1000 Likes Without Facebook Ads
Introduction to the section & Overview of what will be covered

2 - Why Facebook?
3 reasons why Facebook is important for your business:
 - Over 1.5 billion people spend time sharing the most important parts of their lives on Facebook and this is where businesses can 
   engage them in conversation.
 - Average Facebook user has 200 Friends. This social network enables a viral marketing effect that can grow your customer base much 
   faster than traditional marketing.
 - Gather valuable marketing information. Use Facebook Insights to dig deeper into your fan base and create a detailed buyer persona. 
   Info like demographic breakdowns and what specifically fans are interested are more readily available and accurate on Facebook than 
   on YouTube, Google Analytics etc.

3 - Create Your Facebook Page
How to create your FB page
Get started at www.facebook.com/pages/create
Page Type has  six options, most small businesses will only need to use two
 - “Company, Organization, or Institution”
 - “Local Business or Place.”
Page Category: Choose the appropriate category for your business.
Page Name & Username: Enter your business or brand name (& skip remaining steps)

4 - Facebook Icon
Author recommends using Canva to create icons
Use a simple logo or symbolic representation of your business. 
Optimal size: 540 x 540 pixels.

5 - Facebook Cover Image
This is prime real estate so make full use of it. 
It can be change for seasonal events or to drive call to actions. 
Again yoy can get Sizes & Templates at Canva.com.

6 - Description & About Page
Add in the “about” section on your page. 
Don’t sell, interact and connect. 
Include specific keywords and a call to action.

7 - Apps & Tabs
Cross promote other social media, 
 - Collect email sign ups
 - Display blog posts
 - Run competitions 
 - Customer support
 - Sell your products.

8 - Page Settings
There are no right or wrong settings. 
Should be based on your personal needs.

9 - 9 Post Formulas Gauranteed to Drive Engagement
Give people a reason to like your page. 
 - Show the value and type of posts they can expect to receive in future.
Supercharge your brand’s social word-of-mouth. 
 - Every comment, “like,” and share you receive is another opportunity to reach a new audience.

10 - Edgerank Algorithm
A large amount of content on Facebook, it has a filtering system called EdgeRank 
 - Limits the content people see in their newsfeed.
You need to be strategic about your posts. 
Three main factors
 - Affinity
 - Weight
 - Time Decay
Edgerank is not used anymore
Use the post formulas below to creates posts that people will want to share with their friends.

11 - Caption This Photo
Is a fun and simple post and is mostly visual
The only text needed it “Caption this!”
Share from sites such as - http://imgur.com

12 - Quotes
People love to share & Like quotes
2 main types of quotes 
 - Motivational
 - Whimsical
Post a quote as text or as a photo update
Use sites such as Pinterest to find pictures or quotes

13 - Native Videos
Facebook loves videos, especiall when uploaded directly to Face book
Videos can be used to 
 - Discuss new topics
 - Summarise a blog post 
 - Welcome people to your page. 
 - Reiterate call to actions in the post text.

14 - Facebook Contest
Contests give people an incentive to share
Sites such as 
 - https://www.wishpond.com/social-promotions/
 - https://gleam.io/facebook
Alternatively you can simply ask people to compete an action on a post
Be sure to include details about the prize and closing date!

15 - 5 More Facebook Post Formulas
Questions - Questions are a great way to spark dialogue with fans. It is probably the easiest way and one of the best methods to get 
            people to respond to your posts. 
Fill-in-the-Blanks. e.g. “If I had an unlimited marketing budget, I would ________”
Crowdsource For Answers - Instead of answering questions by yourself, why not get your fans to help others who are in need of tips and 
            advice. Simply, update your page with questions from fans.
Remember when - Nostalgia is a great way to engage people. Use simple texts posts or images to give people an opportunity to comment 
            about their memories from that time period 
Repost Your Popular Content - Share your Blog posts, Youtube Videos, Quora Answers, Instagram pics etc. that have already been successful
            on other platforms.

16 - Bonus Tips: Content Strategy
Like Similar Pages - Fill your newsfeed with competitors posts so you can see what types of post are getting engagement.
Pin Posts - Give important posts more exposure. It’s great for competitions or posts you want many people to see.
Best Time to Post - After you have made several posts, review Facebook insights to see the the best time to post to maximise engagement.

17 - 10 Tactics to Start Getting Organic Likes
Invite your Facebook friends on your personal profile to like the business page.
Add business page as a workplace on your personal profile.
Ask employees to business page as a workplace.
Share page on your personal profile 

18 - Use Email to Drive Organic Likes
Add a link to email signatures.
Add link to Mailchimp emails.
Invite Gmail contacts to like your page
Invite Linkedin contacts to like your page 
Invite email subscribers to like your page via Mailchimp or email provider.

19 - Use Facebook Groups to Drive Organic Likes
Join 5 relevant groups. 
Comment as your personal profile. 
Like and comment on big threads
Share links to your relevant business Facebook posts.

20 - Add a Facebook Like Box to Your Website
Get code by entering page url - https://developers.facebook.com/docs/plugins/page-plugin 
Add to sidebar, contact us or thank you page.

21 - Secret Strategy to Increase Page Likes
Invite people who have liked your post to like your page
This can be very effective if a post has had a large engagement

22 - 5 Facebook Insights Reports to Measure Success
Author suggests you think of Facebook Insights as
Likes - Reveals the total number of people who have liked your page within a specific time range and also where the like happened 
        (whether on page, page suggestions, mobile, desktop, etc.) You can also see a breakdown of paid vs. organic likes, as well as
        how many people unliked your page.
Reach - This is an important metric because it tells you how many people have seen your posts. You can also see some positive engagement
        metrics, such as likes, comments, and shares.
Posts - Analyzes your content based on post type, targeting, total reach, time of day, and engagement.
Visits - Gives you a breakdown of which pages were visited and also which referring sites brought people to your Facebook page.
People - Shows you the demographics of your fan base. 

23 - Taking Action: Get Your First 1000 Facebook Likes
Practical Action step for individual webpage
Recap of major points from the section



                    Section: 10 - Twitter Marketing
1 - Project: Increase Your Twitter Followers with 10 Strategies
Home page - https://twitter.com
Twitter is a free microblogging platform that allows you publish Tweets that are 140 characters or less.
Twitter followers are the platforms equivalent of “Facebook Fans” and “YouTube Subscribers”. 
Gaining real and genuine Twitter followers enables you to become an influencer in your niche, build relationships and 
drive website traffic and sales on demand.

2 - Why Twitter?
 - 320 Million Active Monthly Users -- Twitter launched in 2006 and is an international powerhouse, with 79 percent of its users 
   living outside the US.
 - Connect With People You Don’t Know. -- Twitter a very open community. Almost all conversations are public and searchable.
   This allows you to discover new people with similar interests to yourself, and build relationships with influencers much easier
   than on Facebook and Linkedin.
 - Research -- News breaks faster on Twitter then anywhere else. Find news or links to industry-related articles, identify trending
   topics and use twitter search to tap into millions of opinions when creating new content.

Find out if Twitter is for you with this exercise
 - Go to Twitter search (no account required), type in your business keywords, topics or  competitors names.
 - If people are having conversation around these topics then Twitter is relevant for you!

3 - How Twitter Works
Twitter may not be as intuitive as Facebook, some things to remember about using twitter are
Twitter 140 character limit - Great for both audience and brand forces concise communication. 
Realtime News Feed - Your Twitter newsfeed is primarily sorted by chronological in order to enable real time conversation about a topic. 
A tweet you send will show up in all your followers accounts stream but only until it’s replaced by fresh content. Therefore, the real
filtering system is time and not the “post you are likely to care about” like on Facebook. What this means is that you have permission 
to tweet a lot. 
@mentions - A mention is a Tweet that contains another user’s @username anywhere in the body of the Tweet. If you include multiple
@usernames in your Tweet, all of those people will see your Tweet in their Notifications tab.
@replies - Send an at-reply to another Twitter user by hitting the Reply button on any tweet. Type your message into the box that pops up
and click Tweet. Your at-reply will show up in this person’s Interactions stream, which means it is more likely to be seen than a 
regular tweet.
Direct messages (DM’s) - If you don’t want anybody but the intended recipient to see your tweet, use a direct message. Click on the
message tabs at the top of your Twitter profile and create a new message. Once you submit it, it will appear in the recipient’s inbox.

4 - What Not To Do
There are a couple of things that you should not do on Twitter
Buying Twitter Followers - Numbers are not everything. What’s more important, 10,000 fans or followers, or 100 who will actually engage
with you?
Using Twitter Bots for Automated Follows & Direct Messages - Focus on having real conversations instead.

5 - 4 Ways To Get More Retweets
As much as possible you would like people to retweet you, some ways are 
Share original content - Everybody loves to be the first to retweet the new stuff. By reacting quickly to breaking news or creating
original content you will automatically increase your chances of being retweeted.
Always Include a Picture - Tweets with images generate 150 percent more retweets than text-only tweets. Upload it directly on to 
Twitter so it’s instantly visible in the timeline – don’t link to a third party photo host (i.e., Instagram) where it requires an 
extra click to be seen.
Ask - People often need a call to action. Simply asking for a retweet can generate 3-4 times the amount of engagement. Just add 
““please retweet” at the start or end of tweet.
Thank others for retweeting you - Let them know that you are aware and appreciative retweets via @replies.

6 - 5 Steps Optimize Your Profile
All Twitter accounts are created equal. There’s no difference between personal or professional account in terms extra features or
functionality like on Facebook.
Create an Account - https://twitter.com/
Twitter Handle - Keep it consistent across all social profiles.
Twitter Icon - Use a close up shot of your face or simple business logo.
Twitter Header Image - Get Sizes & Header Templates at Canva.com
Twitter Bio ideas - Your bio is the only place you have to tell people who you are.

7 - 5 Ways to Promote Your Twitter
  - Email Signatures & Business Cards -- Add a link to Twitter along with other social media accounts.
  - Social Sharing Buttons -- Add a link to your home page and individual posts. 
  - Add a Follow Button to Your Website --Include in posts and on your “about” and “contact us” pages. 
  - Add a Twitter Widget -- Show your latest tweets in your Website sidebar.
  - Cross-Pollinate Social Media Account --  Ask existing email subscribers, YouTube subscribers etc. to follow you on Twitter. 

8 - Use Hastags to Increase Discoverability
Add hashtags (keywords) in the copy of your tweets to increase the discoverability. 
Find trending hashtags on the left hand side of your computer Twitter feed
Use a maximum of two hashtags per tweet
Too many hashtags in a single post can be overwhelming.
Use Twitter symbols to make tweets even more eye-catching.
https://ritetag.com - allows you to find trending hashtags

9 - Follow Top Twitter Users
Follow your influencers and & what they tweet. Pay attention to the type of content they sent out and how they address their audiences.
Use Twitter Lists to influencers, customers or competitors into list so you can keep and eye on their content

10 - The Poster Boy Formula
The poster boy formula is here - http://videofruit.com/blog/poster-boy/
Mention other people - Remember, if you include @usernames in your Tweet, people will see your Tweet in their Notifications tab.
This helps to extend the shelf life and exposure your tweets
Use the “Poster Boy Formula” to Supercharge your Retweets. 
 - Get the attention of influential people and Twitter accounts by mentioning them in Tweets. 
 - Show them the results you’ve gotten by reading their blog / taking their course / using their service etc. 
 - Everyone will retweet this “mini testimonial” because it makes them look good to their audience.

11 - Join a Trending Conversation
This is a very effective way to deepen the connection with existing followers and generate additional high-quality followers.
 Use Twitter Advanced Search to look for the #hash topics and jump in on the conversation

12 - Ask Questions
Asking a question engages your Twitter followers and solicits their experience.
Don’t Just Dump a Link - Ask a question instead. For example, “Do you think banner ads are dead?” followed by a link to your site is 
much more appealing than posting to Twitter, “Banner Ads Are Not Dead.”
Give an Incentive to Answer - “I get tons of replies to my Twitter question if I say that I’ll post their answers on my blog.

13 - Bring Twitter Into the Physical World
When doing things like podcasts etc there will be opportunities to bring in your twitter feed

14 - Track Results: Twitter Analytics
Twitter like other Social Media platforms has it own analytics located at
  - https://analytics.twitter.com/about
There are many tutorials available to help customise for individual cases such as
  - https://blog.bufferapp.com/twitter-analytics

15 - Bonus Tip. Schedule Tweets with Buffer
https://buffer.com 
Buffer allows you to schedule your posts to appropriate times of the day
Free and paid options are available

16 - Taking Action: Implement Strategies to Increase Twitter Followers



                    Section: 11 - Quora Marketing
1 - Project: Become an Authority & Drive Long Term Website Traffic
Homepage -- https://www.quora.com
Quora is one of the largest question and answer websites in the world 
It grows very quickly in 2016 first quarter visitors increased by 20%
Quora is much less competitive than other social sites like Facebook and Twitter.

2 - Why Quora?
Quora is a source of Long-Term Traffic
  - Top answers get huge visibility and every answer you write can bring in traffic for years to come.
  - When someone “upvotes” your answer, it appears in their feed and is visible to all of their followers which is a viral effect.
  - Quora also ranks extremely high in Google search.
Quora lets you establish yourself as an Authority
  - Would like to be publicly acknowledged as a authority in your topic? (Very good for all sorts of reasons)
  - On Quora, you can earn a badge on your profile if you become a “Most Viewed Writer”.
Quora can get you noticed by major publications
  - Major publications are now sourcing content directly from Quora
  - This gives an opportunity to be featured in publications with wide name recognition

3 - How to Join Quora & Optimise Your Profile
4 things to do to register & optimise for quora 
Give Your Profile a Killer Headline - Your bio should signal to your audience that you’re qualified to answer their questions.
Add Detail Using Your Profile Summary - Include a link to your website or some of your top Quora answers.
Claim Your Core Topics - Get started by viewing this list of the most followed topics.
Follow other people - Understand how top writers are successful, make connections with people in your topic and Quora followers

4 - How to Identify Questions That Are Worth Answering
Two different but equally valid approaches to answering questions on Quora
Rapid Fire Strategy - This is where you identify multiple smaller but similar questions to answer. Look for questions with 1000 views 
and less than 5 Answers. This is a perfect strategy for beginners and it's easy to become the top answer.
Big Game Strategy - You will need to identify questions with 100,000+ views and 500+ followers. Be prepared to invest more time in 
crafting a longer more detailed answer. Much harder to become the #1 answer but you can take advantage of large number of “followers” 
on a question and use like a mailing list.

5 - How to Choose or Create a Blog Post to Link Back To
  - Don’t give away all the details.
  - Have an incentive to click through to your website.
  - Set up an email capture form

6 - How to Structure Your Answers For Maximum Clicks
  - Context. Answer the question asked!
  - Headline. Write an engaging headline which references the question.
  - Add relevant images / videos. Use Canva.com to help your answers stand out.
  - Make it personal. Use personal pronouns and reference personal experiences.
  - Back up your points. Links out to helpful resources, facts etc.
  - Make it easy to read. Avoid big chunks of text! Use Bold, italics, bullet points to format your answers.
  - Add a custom bio for each question

7 - How to Promote Your Quora Answers
  - Promote each answer through your social channels: Facebook, Twitter etc.

8 - How to Track Quora Traffic & ROI in Google Analytics
The procedure for setting up Google Analytics
  - Set Up -- Install Google Analytics on your website and set up a goal tracking (e.g. email signups)
  - Google Analytics -- Click Acquisition -> Social -> Network Referrals to analyze Quora traffic
  - Quora Stats -- Click account -> Stats to see most viewed questions.

9 - Rinse & Repeat [Just 5 Mins a Day!]
3 Things to do daily
  - Consistently answer questions to increase website traffic from Quora.
  - Schedule 5 mins a day in your calendar for Quora.
  - Use this 5 mins daily to read answers, write questions, build your authority, connect with influencers and generate content ideas!

10 - Taking Action: Promote Your Quora Answers



                    Section: 12 - Google Adwords
Indepth google AdWords notes available at
 - https://github.com/marb61a/Course-Notes/blob/master/Marketing/Adwords
 
1 - Project: Create Your First Profitable Adwords Campaign
2 - Benefits of Google Adwords
3 - How Google Adwords Works
4 - Define Success & Set Up Tracking
5 - Analyse Your PPC Competition
6 - Have a Congruent Landing Page
7 - Select The Right Campaign Type
8 - Target Your Audience
9 - Determine Your Bids & Budgets
10 - Write Effective Ads
11 - Choose Profitable Keywords
12 - Advanced Campaign Settings
13 - Measure & Optimise
14 - Taking Action: Create Your First Profitable Campaign



                    Section: 13 - Google Analytics
1 - Project: Take a Data Driven Approach to Growth
Included in the section is a download link to - Google Analytics Audit Checklist
Checklist covers practical setup of Google Analytics for a project

2 - Install Google Analytics
Tutorial available - https://support.google.com/analytics/answer/1008080?hl=en

3 - Enable These 3 Essential Reports
4 - Set up Goal Tracking to Measure Success
5 - Filter Internal Traffic So You Don't Skew Your Data
6 - Add Custom Dashboard to Reveal 12 Essential Metrics
7 - Get Notified for Traffic Drops & Spikes with Custom Alerts
8 - Make Google Analytics Annotations So You Don't Forget
9 - Analyze Demographics Reports (Age, Gender, Interests & Behaviour)
10 - Analyze Geo Report (Language & Location)
11 - Analyze Technology & Mobile Report (Browser, OS & Devices)
12 - Analyze Acquisition Overview Report
13 - Analyze Source/Medium Report
14 - Analyze Best Days to Post
15 - Use Campaign Tagging to Improve Acquisition Data Accuracy
16 - Analyze Landing Pages Report
17 - Analyze All Pages Report
18 - Analyze Exit Pages Report
19 - Analyze Goals Report
20 - Taking Action: How to Decide Which Insights to Prioritse
21 - Bonus: How to Remove Spam Traffic



                    Section: 14 - Conclusion
1 - You've Done It! ...12 Key Takeaways from This Course
Conclusion of the course which involves 1 key take away from each section of the course

2 - How to Get Your Certificate of Completition
