                    Complete Digital Marketing Course 
                    Course Notes Part 9


5 - How to Choose or Create a Blog Post to Link Back To
  - Don’t give away all the details.
  - Have an incentive to click through to your website.
  - Set up an email capture form

6 - How to Structure Your Answers For Maximum Clicks
  - Context. Answer the question asked!
  - Headline. Write an engaging headline which references the question.
  - Add relevant images / videos. Use Canva.com to help your answers stand out.
  - Make it personal. Use personal pronouns and reference personal experiences.
  - Back up your points. Links out to helpful resources, facts etc.
  - Make it easy to read. Avoid big chunks of text! Use Bold, italics, bullet points to format your answers.
  - Add a custom bio for each question

7 - How to Promote Your Quora Answers
  - Promote each answer through your social channels: Facebook, Twitter etc.

8 - How to Track Quora Traffic & ROI in Google Analytics
The procedure for setting up Google Analytics
  - Set Up -- Install Google Analytics on your website and set up a goal tracking (e.g. email signups)
  - Google Analytics -- Click Acquisition -> Social -> Network Referrals to analyze Quora traffic
  - Quora Stats -- Click account -> Stats to see most viewed questions.

9 - Rinse & Repeat [Just 5 Mins a Day!]
3 Things to do daily
  - Consistently answer questions to increase website traffic from Quora.
  - Schedule 5 mins a day in your calendar for Quora.
  - Use this 5 mins daily to read answers, write questions, build your authority, connect with influencers and generate content ideas!

10 - Taking Action: Promote Your Quora Answers



                    Section: 12 - Google Adwords
Indepth google AdWords notes available at
 - https://github.com/marb61a/Course-Notes/blob/master/Marketing/Adwords
 
1 - Project: Create Your First Profitable Adwords Campaign
2 - Benefits of Google Adwords
3 - How Google Adwords Works
4 - Define Success & Set Up Tracking
5 - Analyse Your PPC Competition
6 - Have a Congruent Landing Page
7 - Select The Right Campaign Type
8 - Target Your Audience
9 - Determine Your Bids & Budgets
10 - Write Effective Ads
11 - Choose Profitable Keywords
12 - Advanced Campaign Settings
13 - Measure & Optimise
14 - Taking Action: Create Your First Profitable Campaign



                    Section: 13 - Google Analytics
1 - Project: Take a Data Driven Approach to Growth
Included in the section is a download link to - Google Analytics Audit Checklist
Checklist covers practical setup of Google Analytics for a project

2 - Install Google Analytics
Tutorial available - https://support.google.com/analytics/answer/1008080?hl=en

3 - Enable These 3 Essential Reports
4 - Set up Goal Tracking to Measure Success
5 - Filter Internal Traffic So You Don't Skew Your Data
6 - Add Custom Dashboard to Reveal 12 Essential Metrics
7 - Get Notified for Traffic Drops & Spikes with Custom Alerts
8 - Make Google Analytics Annotations So You Don't Forget
9 - Analyze Demographics Reports (Age, Gender, Interests & Behaviour)
10 - Analyze Geo Report (Language & Location)
11 - Analyze Technology & Mobile Report (Browser, OS & Devices)
12 - Analyze Acquisition Overview Report
13 - Analyze Source/Medium Report
14 - Analyze Best Days to Post
15 - Use Campaign Tagging to Improve Acquisition Data Accuracy
16 - Analyze Landing Pages Report
17 - Analyze All Pages Report
18 - Analyze Exit Pages Report
19 - Analyze Goals Report
20 - Taking Action: How to Decide Which Insights to Prioritse
21 - Bonus: How to Remove Spam Traffic



                    Section: 14 - Conclusion
1 - You've Done It! ...12 Key Takeaways from This Course
Conclusion of the course which involves 1 key take away from each section of the course

2 - How to Get Your Certificate of Completition

