                    Complete Digital Marketing Course 
                    Course Notes Part 1
                    
                    
                    Section: 1 - Introduction
1 - Proof This Course Will Get You Results!
Intro to the author and course

2 - Course Notes
Link to instructors notes

3. Frequently Asked Questions
Answers to frequently answered questions about the course

4. The "One Thing" That Will Transform Your Marketing
A question answered on Quora by the instructor
  - https://www.quora.com/What-are-the-basic-skills-needed-for-success-in-a-marketing-career/answer/Daragh-Walsh?srid=X36f

5 - 5 Best Free Digital Marketing Tools
5 free tools which will benefit your business
  - Keyword Everywhere browser extension
  - Similarweb.com, great for competitor analysis
  - Canva.com, graphic design tool
  - Vid IQ, youtube tool similar to similarweb but for videos
  - Google Analytics Custom Dashboard



                    Section: 2 - Marketing Fundamentals
1 - Project: Create a Buyer Persona & Unique Selling Proposition
A buyer persona is a semi-fictional representation of your ideal customer based on market research and real data about your existing 
customers.
Unique selling proposition - This defines your position in the marketplace and lets you stand apart from competitors.
There is a template available for download which you will fill in with data concerning your own business 

Link provided to instructor site for Course Notes - Buyer Persona

2 - How to Create a Buyer Persona
This is the person you are creating your content, products or service for. They can’t wait for you to launch because you solve a 
problem they have!
Instead of focusing “target market” or something abstract., you humanise your marketing and make it real.
Developing a buyer persona results in stronger and more cost effective marketing.
It allows you to convey a more tailored message, minimise advertising waste and discover objections holding back customers.

Are there any tricks to developing a buyer persona? - Yes! Just look in the mirror.
If you have an idea for a business, more than likely it came from a frustrating experience you had. A problem you needed fixing. 
A solution that didn’t get the results or was just too hard to implement.
You may also have observed a pain point of someone you have close contact with.
It’s unlikely your buyer persona is someone you’ve never met before. How could you understand intimately what’s holding them back 
from achieving their goal?

3 - 8 Ways to Find Your Audience Online
Quora.com – see the most common questions for your niche.
Facebook Groups – review profiles of group members.
Online Marketplaces & Review Sites –Amazon, Yelp, Udemy, AppStore etc.
Typeform – ask what is your biggest fear / frustration with topic x.
Google Analytics – review demographic &  interest reports.
Facebook Analytics – review demographic reports.
YouTube Analytics – review demographic reports.
Just Ask! e.g. what you you want to achieve from this course (see lecture 3).

4 - How to Identify Your Unique Selling Proposition

5 - Recap & Taking Action



                  Section: 3 - Market Research
1 - Project: Validate Your Idea with Typeform
Market research is an important step to validate the assumptions you’ve made about your buyer persona, their needs and how you 
can add value to the marketplace.

2 - Why Typeform?
Typeform is a free online form builder that has exploded in popularity in the last year. Its address is
 - https://www.typeform.com
There is a Wordpress plugin available at the following address
 - https://wordpress.org/plugins/typeform/
You can start creating an online form straight away from the homepage.
You only create an account when you want to save a Typeform you’ve made. Eliminating this sign up step has apparently contributed
to the huge growth that the company has had.
There is a free plan available, the paid plan allows you to
 - Custom Thank You screens
 - Payment fields 
 - Different questions based on respondents answers 

3 - How to Design Your Online Survey
Keep it simple
Examples of Typeform surveys available at 
 - https://www.typeform.com/examples/
You can build your E-Mail list with surveys asking people for their email address
Tools like Zapier allow you to integrate with third party tools
 - https://zapier.com/zapbook/typeform/ -- Allows integration with over 500 tools eg Mailchimp
These integrations are available with the free basic plan so take advantage of this functionality if it makes sense.

4 - How to Distribute Your Online Survey
The easiest way to distribute your online form is to copy the url and share it with your audience
You can share it 
 - By Email
 - Twitter
 - Facebook groups
 - Subreddits 
 - Anywhere your target audience is
Make sure your email subject line or post title is something that will catch people’s attention

5 - How to Analyse Your Survey Results
Real value comes from analyzing the responses to your survey
While the survey is running, you can monitor your metrics across devices in the Typeform dashboard
Recommended to download the results to excel so you can analyze them at a deeper level
Never overlook the value of Pen and Paper to get a better understanding of the customer journey

