                    Complete Digital Marketing Course 
                    Course Notes Part 8


7 - 5 Ways to Promote Your Twitter
  - Email Signatures & Business Cards -- Add a link to Twitter along with other social media accounts.
  - Social Sharing Buttons -- Add a link to your home page and individual posts. 
  - Add a Follow Button to Your Website --Include in posts and on your “about” and “contact us” pages. 
  - Add a Twitter Widget -- Show your latest tweets in your Website sidebar.
  - Cross-Pollinate Social Media Account --  Ask existing email subscribers, YouTube subscribers etc. to follow you on Twitter. 

8 - Use Hastags to Increase Discoverability
Add hashtags (keywords) in the copy of your tweets to increase the discoverability. 
Find trending hashtags on the left hand side of your computer Twitter feed
Use a maximum of two hashtags per tweet
Too many hashtags in a single post can be overwhelming.
Use Twitter symbols to make tweets even more eye-catching.
https://ritetag.com - allows you to find trending hashtags

9 - Follow Top Twitter Users
Follow your influencers and & what they tweet. Pay attention to the type of content they sent out and how they address their audiences.
Use Twitter Lists to influencers, customers or competitors into list so you can keep and eye on their content

10 - The Poster Boy Formula
The poster boy formula is here - http://videofruit.com/blog/poster-boy/
Mention other people - Remember, if you include @usernames in your Tweet, people will see your Tweet in their Notifications tab.
This helps to extend the shelf life and exposure your tweets
Use the “Poster Boy Formula” to Supercharge your Retweets. 
 - Get the attention of influential people and Twitter accounts by mentioning them in Tweets. 
 - Show them the results you’ve gotten by reading their blog / taking their course / using their service etc. 
 - Everyone will retweet this “mini testimonial” because it makes them look good to their audience.

11 - Join a Trending Conversation
This is a very effective way to deepen the connection with existing followers and generate additional high-quality followers.
 Use Twitter Advanced Search to look for the #hash topics and jump in on the conversation

12 - Ask Questions
Asking a question engages your Twitter followers and solicits their experience.
Don’t Just Dump a Link - Ask a question instead. For example, “Do you think banner ads are dead?” followed by a link to your site is 
much more appealing than posting to Twitter, “Banner Ads Are Not Dead.”
Give an Incentive to Answer - “I get tons of replies to my Twitter question if I say that I’ll post their answers on my blog.

13 - Bring Twitter Into the Physical World
When doing things like podcasts etc there will be opportunities to bring in your twitter feed

14 - Track Results: Twitter Analytics
Twitter like other Social Media platforms has it own analytics located at
  - https://analytics.twitter.com/about
There are many tutorials available to help customise for individual cases such as
  - https://blog.bufferapp.com/twitter-analytics

15 - Bonus Tip. Schedule Tweets with Buffer
https://buffer.com 
Buffer allows you to schedule your posts to appropriate times of the day
Free and paid options are available

16 - Taking Action: Implement Strategies to Increase Twitter Followers



                    Section: 11 - Quora Marketing
1 - Project: Become an Authority & Drive Long Term Website Traffic
Homepage -- https://www.quora.com
Quora is one of the largest question and answer websites in the world 
It grows very quickly in 2016 first quarter visitors increased by 20%
Quora is much less competitive than other social sites like Facebook and Twitter.

2 - Why Quora?
Quora is a source of Long-Term Traffic
  - Top answers get huge visibility and every answer you write can bring in traffic for years to come.
  - When someone “upvotes” your answer, it appears in their feed and is visible to all of their followers which is a viral effect.
  - Quora also ranks extremely high in Google search.
Quora lets you establish yourself as an Authority
  - Would like to be publicly acknowledged as a authority in your topic? (Very good for all sorts of reasons)
  - On Quora, you can earn a badge on your profile if you become a “Most Viewed Writer”.
Quora can get you noticed by major publications
  - Major publications are now sourcing content directly from Quora
  - This gives an opportunity to be featured in publications with wide name recognition

3 - How to Join Quora & Optimise Your Profile
4 things to do to register & optimise for quora 
Give Your Profile a Killer Headline - Your bio should signal to your audience that you’re qualified to answer their questions.
Add Detail Using Your Profile Summary - Include a link to your website or some of your top Quora answers.
Claim Your Core Topics - Get started by viewing this list of the most followed topics.
Follow other people - Understand how top writers are successful, make connections with people in your topic and Quora followers

4 - How to Identify Questions That Are Worth Answering
Two different but equally valid approaches to answering questions on Quora
Rapid Fire Strategy - This is where you identify multiple smaller but similar questions to answer. Look for questions with 1000 views 
and less than 5 Answers. This is a perfect strategy for beginners and it's easy to become the top answer.
Big Game Strategy - You will need to identify questions with 100,000+ views and 500+ followers. Be prepared to invest more time in 
crafting a longer more detailed answer. Much harder to become the #1 answer but you can take advantage of large number of “followers” 
on a question and use like a mailing list.

5 - How to Choose or Create a Blog Post to Link Back To
  - Don’t give away all the details.
  - Have an incentive to click through to your website.
  - Set up an email capture form

6 - How to Structure Your Answers For Maximum Clicks
  - Context. Answer the question asked!
  - Headline. Write an engaging headline which references the question.
  - Add relevant images / videos. Use Canva.com to help your answers stand out.
  - Make it personal. Use personal pronouns and reference personal experiences.
  - Back up your points. Links out to helpful resources, facts etc.
  - Make it easy to read. Avoid big chunks of text! Use Bold, italics, bullet points to format your answers.
  - Add a custom bio for each question

7 - How to Promote Your Quora Answers
  - Promote each answer through your social channels: Facebook, Twitter etc.

8 - How to Track Quora Traffic & ROI in Google Analytics
The procedure for setting up Google Analytics
  - Set Up -- Install Google Analytics on your website and set up a goal tracking (e.g. email signups)
  - Google Analytics -- Click Acquisition -> Social -> Network Referrals to analyze Quora traffic
  - Quora Stats -- Click account -> Stats to see most viewed questions.

9 - Rinse & Repeat [Just 5 Mins a Day!]
3 Things to do daily
  - Consistently answer questions to increase website traffic from Quora.
  - Schedule 5 mins a day in your calendar for Quora.
  - Use this 5 mins daily to read answers, write questions, build your authority, connect with influencers and generate content ideas!

10 - Taking Action: Promote Your Quora Answers



                    Section: 12 - Google Adwords
Indepth google AdWords notes available at
 - https://github.com/marb61a/Course-Notes/blob/master/Marketing/Adwords
 
1 - Project: Create Your First Profitable Adwords Campaign
2 - Benefits of Google Adwords
3 - How Google Adwords Works
4 - Define Success & Set Up Tracking
5 - Analyse Your PPC Competition
6 - Have a Congruent Landing Page
7 - Select The Right Campaign Type
8 - Target Your Audience
9 - Determine Your Bids & Budgets
10 - Write Effective Ads
11 - Choose Profitable Keywords
12 - Advanced Campaign Settings
13 - Measure & Optimise
14 - Taking Action: Create Your First Profitable Campaign



                    Section: 13 - Google Analytics
1 - Project: Take a Data Driven Approach to Growth
Included in the section is a download link to - Google Analytics Audit Checklist
Checklist covers practical setup of Google Analytics for a project

2 - Install Google Analytics
Tutorial available - https://support.google.com/analytics/answer/1008080?hl=en

3 - Enable These 3 Essential Reports
4 - Set up Goal Tracking to Measure Success
5 - Filter Internal Traffic So You Don't Skew Your Data
6 - Add Custom Dashboard to Reveal 12 Essential Metrics
7 - Get Notified for Traffic Drops & Spikes with Custom Alerts
8 - Make Google Analytics Annotations So You Don't Forget
9 - Analyze Demographics Reports (Age, Gender, Interests & Behaviour)
10 - Analyze Geo Report (Language & Location)
11 - Analyze Technology & Mobile Report (Browser, OS & Devices)
12 - Analyze Acquisition Overview Report
13 - Analyze Source/Medium Report
14 - Analyze Best Days to Post
15 - Use Campaign Tagging to Improve Acquisition Data Accuracy
16 - Analyze Landing Pages Report
17 - Analyze All Pages Report
18 - Analyze Exit Pages Report
19 - Analyze Goals Report
20 - Taking Action: How to Decide Which Insights to Prioritse
21 - Bonus: How to Remove Spam Traffic



                    Section: 14 - Conclusion
1 - You've Done It! ...12 Key Takeaways from This Course
Conclusion of the course which involves 1 key take away from each section of the course

2 - How to Get Your Certificate of Completition

