                    Complete Digital Marketing Course 
                    Course Notes Part 6


4 - Facebook Icon
Author recommends using Canva to create icons
Use a simple logo or symbolic representation of your business. 
Optimal size: 540 x 540 pixels.

5 - Facebook Cover Image
This is prime real estate so make full use of it. 
It can be change for seasonal events or to drive call to actions. 
Again yoy can get Sizes & Templates at Canva.com.

6 - Description & About Page
Add in the “about” section on your page. 
Don’t sell, interact and connect. 
Include specific keywords and a call to action.

7 - Apps & Tabs
Cross promote other social media, 
 - Collect email sign ups
 - Display blog posts
 - Run competitions 
 - Customer support
 - Sell your products.

8 - Page Settings
There are no right or wrong settings. 
Should be based on your personal needs.

9 - 9 Post Formulas Gauranteed to Drive Engagement
Give people a reason to like your page. 
 - Show the value and type of posts they can expect to receive in future.
Supercharge your brand’s social word-of-mouth. 
 - Every comment, “like,” and share you receive is another opportunity to reach a new audience.

10 - Edgerank Algorithm
A large amount of content on Facebook, it has a filtering system called EdgeRank 
 - Limits the content people see in their newsfeed.
You need to be strategic about your posts. 
Three main factors
 - Affinity
 - Weight
 - Time Decay
Edgerank is not used anymore
Use the post formulas below to creates posts that people will want to share with their friends.

11 - Caption This Photo
Is a fun and simple post and is mostly visual
The only text needed it “Caption this!”
Share from sites such as - http://imgur.com

12 - Quotes
People love to share & Like quotes
2 main types of quotes 
 - Motivational
 - Whimsical
Post a quote as text or as a photo update
Use sites such as Pinterest to find pictures or quotes

13 - Native Videos
Facebook loves videos, especiall when uploaded directly to Face book
Videos can be used to 
 - Discuss new topics
 - Summarise a blog post 
 - Welcome people to your page. 
 - Reiterate call to actions in the post text.

14 - Facebook Contest
Contests give people an incentive to share
Sites such as 
 - https://www.wishpond.com/social-promotions/
 - https://gleam.io/facebook
Alternatively you can simply ask people to compete an action on a post
Be sure to include details about the prize and closing date!

15 - 5 More Facebook Post Formulas
Questions - Questions are a great way to spark dialogue with fans. It is probably the easiest way and one of the best methods to get 
            people to respond to your posts. 
Fill-in-the-Blanks. e.g. “If I had an unlimited marketing budget, I would ________”
Crowdsource For Answers - Instead of answering questions by yourself, why not get your fans to help others who are in need of tips and 
            advice. Simply, update your page with questions from fans.
Remember when - Nostalgia is a great way to engage people. Use simple texts posts or images to give people an opportunity to comment 
            about their memories from that time period 
Repost Your Popular Content - Share your Blog posts, Youtube Videos, Quora Answers, Instagram pics etc. that have already been successful
            on other platforms.

16 - Bonus Tips: Content Strategy
Like Similar Pages - Fill your newsfeed with competitors posts so you can see what types of post are getting engagement.
Pin Posts - Give important posts more exposure. It’s great for competitions or posts you want many people to see.
Best Time to Post - After you have made several posts, review Facebook insights to see the the best time to post to maximise engagement.

17 - 10 Tactics to Start Getting Organic Likes
Invite your Facebook friends on your personal profile to like the business page.
Add business page as a workplace on your personal profile.
Ask employees to business page as a workplace.
Share page on your personal profile 

