                    The Complete Wordpress Website Business Course - Gregg Davis

                    Section: 1 - About this Course
1 - What You Need for this Course
Quick intro to course
Wordpress is open source
The instrucor gives a list of tools needed
- Atom or Notepad++
- Ftp, fireftp or filezilla
- GIMP, Pixler, PhotR

2 - What You'll Learn in this Course
A run through of what will be learned in the course
CMS - Content Management System
Huge community of plugins and themes
A very quick run through of the features of a wordpress installation

3 - WordPress Business Basics - Tools
Tools needed to setup the business site
Explanations of terms such as Hosting, URL Domain Name etc
Dont use word processor for text formatting
Using Excel or Google spreadsheet templates, 3rd party templates are available
Use PDF for send invoices to clients due to them not being editable
Paypal Business Account is recommended to be used for clients to pay 


                    Section: 2 - Prepare Hosting, Servers, and Install WordPress
1 - Website Hosting and Development Options
An exploration of the different hosting options available
  - Shared
  - Dedicated
  - VPS
  - Cloud
 Recommended to have have hosting as part of your sales options due to the recurring income that it can provide

2 - Your Free SiteGround Hosting Account
How to setup a free account with Siteground Hosting (exclusive deal as part of the course)
Some settings are changed by the instructor eg time
Permalinks are changed to posts which are best for SEO urposes

3 - Your Free Flywheel Hosting Account
How to setup a free account with Flywheel Hosting (exclusive deal as part of the course)
Flywheel offers managed Wordpress hosting
You will need to verify by either credit card or sms text message
Same preferences setup
Limit login attempts plugin installed by default

4 - Install WordPress Manually
Installing WP on local machine
Course instructor uses MAMP but there are multiple alternatives such as XAMPP

5 - Explore WordPress Files and Database
Akismet is used to stop spam
WP-Content is where plugins etc go
On Siteground the Jetpack plugin is installed by default
You can change url on PHPMyAdmin, which can help recover DNS errors
Editing themes using functions.php has best practice
Wordpress has a built in editor for editing files
Always have a backup copy of any file being edited
Dont use admin as user name
You can change username from within PHPMyAdmin

6 - Get Your Sandbox
As part of the course there is a student sandbox available for comletion of the exercises during the course
List of sandbox installed plugins

7 - WordPress Defaults
Conecntrating on local installation
Wordpress has several default settings which should be changed
Clicking appearence -> themes shows themes
Wordpress ships with 2 default plugins, they need to be activated
Plugin can be deleted easily
Akismet is recommended when site is finished



                     Section 3: - Build a Brochure Site
1 - Create a New WordPress Installation
First practical project of the course
Simple brochure site
Fresh install of WP either locally or on Siteground
Settings as per previous setup videos
Remote installation not using WP wizard has more steps than local install

2 - Salts and Plugins

3 - Static Homepage and Posts

4 - Interior Pages, Navigation and Sidebar

5 - Configure Contact Form

6 - Configure Google Maps

7 - Configure Google Analytics



                     Section: 4 - Build a Blog Style Homepage Site
1 - Modify Homepage and Import Sample

2 - Change Theme and Modify Homepage

3 - Revise Navigation, Header and Footer

4 - Categories and Category Navigation

5 - Tags and Tag Navigation

6 - Post Formats and Finishing Up



                    Section: 5 - Migrating WordPress for Staging and Development
1 - Site Migration using Plugins

2 - Migrate a Site Manually

3 - Hosting Differences and Migration Services

4 - Migrate a Live Site to Local Staging

5 - Change Theme and Update Live Site



                    Section: 6 - Premium Themes, Frameworks and Child Themes
1 - Why Premium Themes?

2 - Frameworks and Child Themes

3 - Create a Child Theme Manually

4 - Create a Child Theme Using a Plugin

5 - Change the Admin Dashboard

6 - Genesis Child Themes in the Sandbox

7 - More Genesis Child Theme Edits

8 - Code Snippets and WP Clips Plugins



                    Section: 7 - Premium Plugins and Choosing Plugins
1 - Premium Plugins at WPMUDev.org

2 - Envato Market for Premium Plugins

3 - Choosing Plugins from the Repository

4 - Plugin Speed and Performance Testing

5 - Premium vs. Lite Plugin: Soliloquy Slider

6 - Premium Plugins in the Sandbox



                    Section: 8 - Build a Specialized Homepage Site, Corporate Style
1 - Executive Pro: Import Demo Content

2 - Genesis Homepage Widget Areas

3 - Special CSS Classes in Genesis Themes

4 - Navigation, Header and Footer

5 - Custom Post Types and Taxonomies

6 - Featured Post Widgets and Blog Archive

7 - Contact Form and Customizations



                    Section: 9 - Build a Scrolling Homepage Site
1 - Activate and Explore Cafe Pro Theme

2 - Scrolling Navigation with Anchor Tags

3 - Affinity Theme Scrolling Homepage

53. Cafe Pro Homepage Widget Layouts
15:31
54. How I customized the Café Pro Homepage
17:06
55. Custom Post Types with Custompress
16:46
56. Implement Your Custom Post Types
10:31
57. Homepage Content and Conditional Widgets



                     Section: 10 - Custom Post Types with the Author Pro Plugin
1 - Set Up Author Pro Theme and Plugin

59. Frontend Display of Author Pro CPT
18:51
60. Author Pro Homepage and Book Widgets
18:22
61. Further Author Pro Customizations
16:30
62. Book Cover using the PSD Template
17:53
63. Change Themes Preserving CPT Data



                    Section: 11 - Email Systems: Transactional, Marketing and Send/Receive at domains
1 - Two Types of Internal Email: Transactional and Marketing

65. Email Addresses at Private Domains
11:48
66. Transactional Email Setup with Google
18:09
67. Transactional Email Setup with SendGrid
15:31
68. Transactional Email Setup with SparkPost
18:01
69. Mailchimp Marketing and Autoresponders
12:31
70. Mailchimp Signup Forms and Opt-in System
12:11
71. Mailchimp Emails and Thank You Pages
15:57
72. Sandbox form with Genesis Enews Extended
15:32
73. Mailchimp and WordPress User Synchronization



                    Section: 12 - Build an Ecommerce Site
74. WooCommerce Plugin Settings
15:10
75. Custom Post Types in WooCommerce
16:53
76. Account, Cart and Checkout Pages
19:32
77. Payment Systems and Inventory
12:34
78. Shipping and Digital Delivery
19:39
79. Free Product and Store Customizations
17:07
80. Marketing List Sync and Store Emails



                    Section: 13 - Managing Updates, Security and Speed
1 - WordPress Core Updates

2 - Plugin and Theme Updates

3 - Managing Multiple Websites

4 - Hosting and Third Party Security Services

5 - Security Plugins and Monitoring

6 - Multiple Backups and Restore Systems

7 - Using https:// and SSL Certificates

https-htaccess-code.txt
 
                    Section: 14 - Proposals, Maintenance Plans, and Client Billing
1 - Website Proposals that Win Clients

2 - Website Care Plans & Recurring Income

