                    ISTQB Certified Tester Foundation Level
                    Course Notes Part 32
                    

Condition and path coverage (cont)
  - Sometimes, there may be no test cases that can satisfy all criteria for a program. 
  - Statements that cannot be exercised even once are unreachable. 
  - For example, you've written a program that performs calculations such as addition, subtraction, and multiplication.
    - When you review the structure of the code, you find that the program doesn't call the multiplication function. 
    - In this case, the multiplication function can't be tested, and as a result, those statements are unreachable. 
    - You need to correct the code structure so that all functions are accessible and can be tested.
  - Unreachable statements can also exist in programs that check for uncommon error conditions. 
    - It could also occur when code becomes unmanageable because it keeps accumulating when converting legacy applications.
  - This problem can occur even in well-designed and well-maintained code. 
    - If it happens, you need to perform detailed code coverage analysis and then test the code once again. 
    - The testing process should accommodate the time and effort spent on these additional activities.

Experience-based techniques
  - In most of the structure-based testing techniques, such as statement, decision, condition, and path coverage testing, 
    - specifications for testing the software are already provided.

However, in situations in which sufficient specifications aren't available for test cases, you have to rely on your experience and skill as a tester. This is called experience-based testing.

Experience-based testing supplements specification-based testing. In experience-based testing, you rely on past experience with similar technologies to help determine the areas likely to contain errors. You use your skill and intuition to locate defects that can't be found using any other testing technique.

Experience-based testing is called ad hoc or reactive testing because the specifics of these tests are defined while testing the software. In
ad hoc testing, test details are either created spontaneously or as a reaction to the functionality of the software system.

Because this type of testing is ad hoc, you need a framework to ensure that adequate tests are exercised. To define the framework, you need to have a general understanding of the type of bugs, system weaknesses, and previous defects identified.

Because experience-based testing is open-ended and doesn't follow any specification, you need to keep two key factors in mind. These include

managing time and effort
Because reactive tests are open-ended, you have to run them in a "time-boxed" manner. For example, consider a situation where you've developed a pilot software program that has requirements that are not closed, and you need to test the product for possible enhancements. In this instance, you would run an experience-based test. The time allocated for testing the software would depend on the risks associated with the test conditions, the complexity of the area to be tested, and the time required to test a specific use case.
tracking test coverage
To track coverage, you would need test charters containing a high-level description of the test cases. For example, suppose you need to test the spell-check function of a word-processing application. In this case, you create the test charter called test_spell_check and specify the time box as 60 minutes. This means the tester is not expected to take more than 60 minutes to test the spell-check function and would exceed the time limit only if the product contains an unexpected number of bugs.
One type of experience-based testing technique is error guessing. In this technique, you guess the location of an error according to your testing experience with previous applications.

Although this type of testing has no specifications, you can create test cases according to the application. Consider an application that contains a Zip code field. When testing this application using the error guessing technique, you check for various cases including whether the user has entered a five-digit number.

Although error guessing is an ad hoc technique, you can systemize this test technique. For this, you need to understand how the software works and identify the possible ways for the software to fail.

After you identify potential failures, you can organize and categorize them into types. You can include this information while designing test cases for the system.

You can also use error guessing to detect buffer overrun – an input string that is too long for the program to handle. This error can occur when developers do not insert checkpoints in the code to check the size of inputs.

Other defects you can detect using the error guessing technique are division by zero, no input values in a field, empty files, and entering wrong data in a field.

Using this technique, you can also detect errors you think would never occur in the software. For example, the software manufacturer claims that you can use the software to modify 100 records simultaneously. So as an experienced tester, you should try entering 100, or approximately 100, records to test this feature of the software.


2. Exploratory techniques
Exploratory testing technique is another kind of experience-based testing technique. It is a combination of ad hoc and structure-based testing.

Exploratory testing is the process by which you design test cases, execute tests, and log test results based on a test charter within a time box. A test charter contains test objectives and the time box denotes a specific span of time within which testing should be completed.

You typically perform exploratory tests if specifications are missing or if they're insufficient or if time is limited. You perform exploratory tests in addition to specification-based tests to ensure that most of the critical defects are detected.

In the exploratory test technique, the testers control the design of the tests. Based on their experience, the testers decide the aspects of the product to be tested, the coverage of tests, and the time frame within which the testing should be completed. The information gained from the tests is used to create new tests.

In exploratory testing, you learn about the software by exploring it and figuring out how it works. When you explore the system, you make decisions about what to test within the stipulated time.

To perform exploratory tests, you follow a sequence of steps:

understanding how the system works
making informed guesses regarding the location of the errors
designing a test case to check for bugs
executing the tests
When time is limited, skilled testers design and execute test cases in parallel, based on a test charter. Therefore, while the tests are performed, you need to simultaneously document the test cases and test conditions because no separate time is allotted for documenting.

As a skilled tester, you should generate a test log that contains the main aspects of the tested product, defects, if any, and the strategies implemented to discover those defects. You can then use these findings to create test cases for other similar projects.

Although you can perform exploratory tests on any type of project, they're usually performed when the requirements of a product or a project change frequently. An example of such a product is one that is updated every two months. With each new release, product features are enhanced. Exploratory testing can help you test the new features and check the compatibility between current and previous versions of the software.

In this case, it would be difficult to maintain scripted test cases because you need to constantly update them. And because exploratory tests don't require you to maintain test cases, you save time and effort spent on documenting them.

You can also use exploratory tests when you want to provide feedback on a new product or feature. You use this technique if you want to find the most serious defect in the shortest possible time.

Exploratory tests performed by skilled and experienced testers can be more beneficial and effective than structured tests performed by less-experienced testers.


Choosing Software Test Techniques
Learning Objective
After completing this topic, you should be able to

recognize which set of software testing techniques are most appropriate in a given scenario
1. Selecting a test technique
You can use various software testing techniques, such as structure-based, specification-based, and experience-based, depending on the requirements of your project. None of these techniques are right, wrong, better, or worse because each technique is suitable for a specific situation and covers a certain area. However, sometimes you might need to use multiple techniques because a single technique would be inadequate for detecting errors.

Sometimes, test specifications are well documented, but the code doesn't cover all the specifications. Such discrepancies can be detected only through specification-based testing.

In some cases, you may need to use a combination of testing techniques because one alone may not be sufficient to detect all types of bugs in the software. For example, to test complex software, you must use specification-based test techniques. Then to complement this, you would use experience-based testing. This approach helps discover bugs that couldn't be detected using specification-based techniques alone.

Graphic
The three types of test techniques are specification-based, structure-based, and experience-based.

Suppose you're testing software that doesn't contain sufficient documentation for creating specification-based test cases. You have a limited amount of time to run a structured test. In this scenario, you should rely on the skills and experience of the tester to exercise the important areas of the software.

Assume that you've created a complex web application. All the specifications are well documented and there is separate time allocated for testing the software before it is deployed.

You might want to perform exhaustive and thorough testing. So you use structure-based techniques, such as statement and decision testing. These techniques help you test the structure and logic of the application code.

Graphic
The first column contains four conditions listed on four rows. In the second column, Rule1, there is Y in the conditions 1 and 2 rows and there is N in the conditions 3 row. In the third column, Rule2, there is N in the conditions 1 row and Y in the conditions 2 and 3 rows. In the fourth column, there is N in the conditions 2 and 3 rows.

Determining the technique used to test an application or software depends on various internal factors.


The models used while developing the system
Your choice of testing technique would depend on the software model used during specification, design, development, and implementation of the system. For example, if the specification requires you to test various cases with different possible outcomes, you use the decision table testing technique.

Knowledge and experience of the tester
The knowledge, skill, and experience of the tester is another factor that influences the choice of test techniques. If you want to test a system based on equivalence partitioning and boundary values and if the tester is an expert in boundary-value analysis, you might decide to perform boundary-value analysis testing instead of equivalence testing.

Potential defects
Based on past experience, if you know that certain defects are likely to be present in the system, it's easier to select the test technique. You can find the areas with likely defects if you have experience with similar applications or technology. For example, if you have tested the previous version of an application, you can use that experience to discover likely errors in the current version.

Test objective
The test technique you select also depends on the test objective. Suppose you've created a financial application and you want to test whether it functions as expected. So, you employ the use-cases approach. If you want to perform complete and rigorous testing, you use structure-based techniques.

Documentation
The extent and style of documentation plays an important role in determining the test technique. If the specifications are missing or aren't well documented, you use an experience-based test approach. However, if the specifications are detailed and contain diagrams that explain state transition, you use the state transition testing technique.

Life cycle model
Your choice of test technique depends on the testing life cycle model you use. If you're using the iterative life cycle model where you have to test various values in a loop structure, exploratory testing should be used. But if you're using the sequential model, you can test the application using structure-based techniques.

In addition to the internal factors, various external factors affect the choice of test techniques. They are

risk
The risk involved in testing safety-critical systems, such as radiation therapy machines, is very high. So you need to devise structure-based testing techniques to thoroughly test the application. There could also be an associated commercial risk involving quality or time-to-market issues, so you use exploratory testing to test the application.
contractual requirements
Your company has signed a contractual agreement with the client to test their software applications. The contract specifies that you need to use boundary value analysis and equivalence partitioning techniques. Even though other techniques, such as decision and path testing would equally be suitable, you have to use the technique stipulated in the contract.
type of system
The type of test technique you use also depends on the type of systems, such as an embedded or a financial system. Suppose you're testing a loan application and want to test the various conditions for approving loan amounts. You also want to test the outcomes of all the conditions. In such a situation, you use the decision-table testing technique.
regulatory requirements
Some industries have regulatory guidelines that form a basis for choosing test techniques. For example, the medical industry might require the use of equivalence partitioning and boundary value analysis for testing life-critical medical software systems. So you use these techniques in addition to structure-based techniques, such as decision coverage and path testing.
time and cost
If you have sufficient time and if the required budget is sanctioned, you can use a combination of different test techniques. But if time and budget are limited, you might use the one technique, such as experience-based testing, that best meets the requirements of the application.
                    
