Useful DOS commands from
  - https://www.c3scripts.com/tutorials/msdos/commands.html

cd : Change directory or display current directory path.
cls : Clear the window.
dir : Display list of contents of current directory.
help : Display list of commands or help about a command.
notepad : Run the Windows Notepad text editor.
type : Displays the contents of a text file.
Some other useful commands are:

assoc : Displays or modifies filename extension associations.
attrib : Displays or changes file attributes.
call : Calls one batch program file from another.
chkdsk : Checks a disk and displays a status report.
chkntfs : Displays or modifies the checking of disk at startup.
color : Sets the text and background colors.
comp : Compares the contents of two files or sets of files.
copy : Copies one or more files to another location. See also: xcopy
date : Displays or sets the computer's date. See also: time
del (or erase) : Deletes one or more files.
defrag : Defragment the specified storage device.
doskey : Display command history; define macros.
echo : Displays messages, or turns command echoing on/off.
edit : Runs the MS-DOS text editor. See also: notepad
exit : Closes the MS-DOS window.
fc : Compares two files or sets of files and displays the differences.
find : Searches for a text string in a file or files.
findstr : Search for a regular expression text string in a file or files.
goto : Used in a batch program file to jump to a particular line.
if : Used in a batch program file to perform conditional testing.
md (or mkdir) : Creates a directory.
more : Displays the contents of a file one screen at a time.
move : Moves one or more files from one directory to another directory.
rd (or rmdir) : Removes a directory.
rem : Used in a batch program file to identify comments.
ren (or rename) : Renames a file or files.
sort : Sorts input.
start : Starts a new window to run a specified program or command.
time : Displays or sets the computer's time. See also: date
tree : Graphically displays the directory structure of a drive or directory.
xcopy : Copies files and directory trees. See also: copy
