Exercise
Select all data from the orchestras table. As you can see, it consists of the following columns:

    id – the ID of a given orchestra,
    name – the name of a given orchestra,
    members_number – the total number of members of a given orchestra,
    rating – the average rating of a given orchestra over the last ten years,
    city_origin – the city from which a given orchestra originates,
    country_origin – the country of origin of a given orchestra,
    year_origin – year in which a given orchestra was created.

Solution
SELECT * FROM orchestras


Exercise
Select all data from the concerts table. It has the following six columns:

    id – the ID of a given concert,
    city – the name of the city where a given concert took place,
    country – the name of the country where a given concert took place,
    year – the year in which a given concert was held,
    rating – the average rating (by critics) of a given concert,
    orchestra_id – the ID of the orchestra that performed at a given concert.

Solution
SELECT * FROM concerts


Exercise
Select all data from the members table. This table contains information about a few selected members of orchestras, and consists of the following columns:

    id – the ID of a given member,
    name – the name of a given member,
    position – the position of a given member in an orchestra,
    wage – the fixed monthly payment a given musician receives,
    experience – the number of years of experience a given musician has,
    orchestra_id – the ID of the orchestra in which a given musician works.

Solution
SELECT * FROM members


Exercise
Select all data from the instruments table. It contains information about instruments owned by the musicians that are members of a given orchestra. 
The instruments table consists of the following columns:

    id – the ID of a given instrument,
    owner_id – the ID of the owner of a given instrument,
    type – the type of a given instrument,
    maker – the name of a given instrument's manufacturer or creator,
    production_year – the year in which a given instrument was produced,
    value – the approximate value of a given instrument.

Solution
SELECT * FROM instruments


Exercise
For each member of the orchestra who has an instrument show their name and the average price (value) they paid for all of their instruments.

Solution
SELECT
	m.name,
    T.avg
FROM
	(  SELECT 
     	 owner_id as o_id, 
     	 AVG(value) as avg
	   FROM instruments 
	   GROUP BY owner_id
    )T
JOIN members m
ON m.id = T.o_id
GROUP BY m.name, T.avg


Exercise
For each orchestra, show a report consisting of:

    Name of the orchestra as the name column.
    Country/Countries in which the orchestra played as the country column.
    Number of concerts in this country as the concerts_no column.
    Average rating of the concerts played by this orchestra in this country as the avg_rating column.

Show only the rows of the report for which the orchestra played more than once in a given country.

Solution
SELECT 
	o.name,
    c.country,
    COUNT(c.id) as concerts_no,
    AVG(c.rating) as avg_rating
FROM orchestras o
JOIN concerts c
ON o.id = c.orchestra_id
GROUP BY o.name, c.country
HAVING COUNT(c.id) > 1
