                    Build Your First Production Quality React App
                    Course Notes
                    
                    
1 - Bootstrap A React Application Through The CLI With Create React App
Start by installing the Create React App cli globally
  - npm install -g create-react-app
To create a react project
  - create-react-app .    // This will create an app in the directory you are in which you may not want
This creates a boilerplate app with some npm commands already installed
  - npm start             // Starts the server
  - npm run build         // Bundles the app into static files
  - npm test              // Starts the test runner
  - npm run eject         // Removes this tool, copies dependencies, config files and scripts into app directory. Permanent!

2 - Render A React UI with JSX


3 - Render A React UI Based on Initial State


4 - Synchronize React UI And State With Controlled Components


5 - Create A Stateless Functional Component For An Input Form


6 - Refactor React Components To Be Stateless Functional Components


7 - Validate Component Input With Prop Types In React


8 - Add Data To A List Without Mutations


9 - Update React Application State From Form Input


10 - Prevent Empty Form Values With Conditional Submit Handlers


11 - Use ES2016 Property Initializer Syntax In ES6 Classes


12 - Update Data In A List Without Mutations


13 - Pass Data To Event Handlers With Partial Function Application


14. Create a Pipe Function to Enable Function Composition


15. Remove Items from a List without Mutations


16. Build a Link Component to Navigate to Routes in React


17. Use React Context to Manage Application State Through Routes


18. Filter Data on Property Values


19. Keep Application State in Sync with Browser History


20. Load Data From a Server with fetch


21. Save Data to the Server with fetch


22. Show Temporary Messages in a React Application


23. Update data on the Server with fetch


24 - Delete Data On The Server With fetch
