Instruction
You already know that your database can do computation because we've already added or subtracted values in our SQL instructions. 
The database can do much more than that. It can compute statistics for multiple rows. This operation is called aggregation.

Let's start with something simple:

SELECT COUNT(*)
FROM orders;

Instead of the asterisk (*) which basically means 'all', we've put the expression COUNT(*).
COUNT(*) is a function. A function in SQL always has a name followed by parentheses. 
In the parentheses, you can put information which the function needs to work. For example, COUNT() calculates the number of rows specified in the parentheses.
In this case, we've used COUNT(*) which basically means 'count all rows'. 
As a result, we'll just get the number of all rows in the table orders – and not their content.

Exercise
Count all rows in the table employees.

Solution
SELECT COUNT(*) FROM EMPLOYEES


Instruction
Naturally, the asterisk (*) isn't the only option available in the function COUNT(). For example, we may ask the database to count the values in a specific column:

SELECT COUNT(customer_id)
FROM orders;

What's the difference between COUNT(*) and COUNT(customer_id)? 
Well, the first option counts all rows in the table and the second option counts all rows where the column customer_id has a specified value. 
In other words, if there is a NULL in the column customer_id, that row won't be counted

Exercise
Check how many non-NULL values in the column position there are in the table employees. Name the column non_null_no.

Solution
SELECT 
	COUNT(POSITION) as non_null_no 
FROM EMPLOYEES


Instruction
As you probably expect, we can also add the keyword DISTINCT in our function COUNT():

SELECT COUNT(DISTINCT customer_id) AS distinct_customers
FROM orders;

This time, we count all rows which have a distinctive value in the column customer_id. 
In other words, this instruction tells us how many different customers have placed an order so far. 
If a customer places 5 orders, the customer will only be counted once.
