                    AZ900 Microsoft Azure Cloud Fundamentals 2021
                    Additional Material Course Notes Part 18


Azure ExpressRoute Overview
  - Microsoft Azure ExpressRoute gives you a private dedicated network circuit 
    - That you can use to link an on-premises data center or network directly into the Azure cloud. 
  - It gives you a dedicated private network link that does not traverse the Internet, as a site-to-site VPN solution would, as an example
    - You might even use both side by side, you might have a site-to-site VPN linking your on-prem network into Azure. You might also have an ExpressRoute circuit for redundancy purposes. With ExpressRoute, you have really two primary billing models. You can select metered, which means that you will be paying per gigabyte of outbound data transfer. However, you also have an unlimited option where you pay a flat fee per month which means what it says, it's unlimited in terms of data transfer.
  - You can also provision more than a single circuit. So this might be useful if you've got different geographical locations that you want to provision a configuration for a private dedicated link that connects into the Azure cloud. With ExpressRoute, you can have a service key. The service key gets generated automatically when you provision an ExpressRoute resource in Azure. So we see an example of what the key might look like. And this is a key that you would provide to your service provider. Now that usually comes in the form of you using the service provider, like a telecom or a network provider locally. You would have an account with them, you would sign into the web portal, and configure the Azure ExpressRoute circuit by pasting this key in there. You can get from 50 megabits per second up to 10 gigabits per second for an Azure ExpressRoute circuit.
So the way that we provision this, from beginning to end, is we start by creating an ExpressRoute resource in Azure. We then would copy the service key. The service key is generated automatically, and it's going to be in the Overview blade of your ExpressRoute resource. So you'll copy that and enter it into your service provider portal to provision ExpressRoute. After which, if you give it a bit of time, the provider status, when you look at the ExpressRoute resource in Azure. In the Overview blade, the provider status will change to Provisioned. And after we've done that, then we can configure specific peering connections, such as Azure private peering connections. Perhaps to link on-premises resources, such as individual virtual machines, even. To our Azure environment through the ExpressRoute circuit.
There are some variations to Azure ExpressRoute to think about, such as ExpressRoute Direct and ExpressRoute Global Reach. With ExpressRoute Direct, it doesn't use a service provider. Clients can make direct connections to Microsoft ExpressRoute Direct routers. And this way, we can have dual links up to 100 gigabits per second. In order for you to take advantage of ExpressRoute Direct, though, you have to send an enrollment email to Microsoft. Specifically to ExpressRouteDirect@microsoft.com. With a couple of details, including your subscription ID and the locations in question that you want to use to make an ExpressRoute Direct connection. ExpressRoute Global Reach is used to link ExpressRoute circuits together.
Now, why would we do this? Well, what you could do as an Azure customer is you could use basically the Microsoft Azure backbone. To allow connectivity from one on-premise location to another. But instead of using a standard WAN over the Internet. You're linking each of those on-premises networks to the Microsoft backbone through ExpressRoute Global Reach. So it allows you to form, then, your own private overlay network between on-premises networks, which sits upon the global Microsoft network. And you're making that connection to Microsoft through ExpressRoute.


Configuring ExpressRoute
In Azure, an ExpressRoute connection gives you a dedicated private network link from your on-premises network or data center directly into the Azure cloud as opposed to going over the Internet through a site-to-site VPN. 
Now, part of configuring this will be to know which provider you're going to use in a region that supports ExpressRoute. In this example, I'm looking at the megaport.com website. And from there, if you don't have an account, creating an account with your provider so that you have a web portal where you can configure part of the ExpressRoute connection. But the first thing we have to do in Azure in the portal is actually create an ExpressRoute resource.
So I'm going to start by clicking Create a resource. I'll type in expressroute, and I'll select ExpressRoute, and I'll click Create.
I'll have to fill in a few details here, the first of which is the name of the circuit. 
So for example, I'm just going to call this first circuit, Circuit1. And I would choose the appropriate provider from the list or depending on where I am in the world, will determine which type of provider I'm going to use. So for example, let's say I select Megaport and I have a peering location. I'll just select here Dallas as an example. And then I can select the bandwidth I want for this particular circuit. So from 50Mbps all the way up to 10. I'm going to start at 50Mbps. But naturally, think about the workloads that will be using this ExpressRoute circuit when you're finished configuring it, to determine what you really need for bandwidth. The default SKU is Standard. I can go for Premium if I'm going to have more than 4000 routes as we see here in the helper screen, or if I need the ability to connect more than 10 virtual networks, and so on.
So I'm going to leave it on Standard for my requirements. The billing model is either Unlimited. So that means what it says, you get a flat monthly charge. Or it's Metered, where you pay per gigabyte of outbound data transfer. I'm going to leave it on Metered, actually. I'm going to switch that over. And I'm going to deploy this into an existing resource group.
And I can specify the location where I want this to be deployed. So, maybe I'll choose (US) West Central US. Okay, and I'm going to go ahead and click Create.
And after a moment, we can see in our notification area that it succeeded, the deployment of the ExpressRoute circuit.
So I'm going to click Go to resource so we can take a quick little peek at it.
What's important here in the Overview blade is the service key. This is what you would need to enter when you are configuring your ExpressRoute circuit on the provider side in the web portal interface. You get to specify the key among some other details. Once that's been done, you'll see that the provider status here will change from Not provisioned to Provisioned, at which point we can then look at things like Connections and Peerings.
For example, if I go down to Peerings, we might want to create an Azure private peered connection. 
Now by doing that, I might for example, want to link my on-premises environment such as maybe even a specific on-premises virtual machine that I want connected to an Azure VNet using the ExpressRoute dedicated circuit. So instead of traversing the Internet to make that VM on-premises talk to Azure, we could do it through the circuit. So we could fill out these types of peering connections. However, because our circuit is not provisioned on the provider side, we can't follow through. But this is normally what you would do. And you can even specify a shared key to authenticate the on-premises environment with the Azure environment through ExpressRoute.                    
                    
                    
Azure Policies Overview
Microsoft Azure policies are all about controlling access to Azure resources.
So we can use built-in policies or, if they don't suit our needs, we can use custom policies that we've created to control resource access.
A policy is really a JSON rule file that we can apply to the creation of new resources in Azure. You can also apply policies to existing ones, maybe to determine if they're compliant with the security baseline. Now, custom policies can be created manually. You could copy an existing policy and tweak it. You can even get policy documents from GitHub repositories. So Azure Policies are considered to be more granular than RBAC. Consider the fact that with role-based access control, or RBAC, you can determine if a technician can or cannot create Azure virtual machines. However, with policies we can get much more granular. And determine which types of virtual machines are allowed to be deployed. And into which regions and so on. So we specify things like locations. Maybe Canada east is an acceptable location where virtual machines can be deployed but not anywhere else.
We can also specify that a default tag value be applied if it's not been applied by the user. Policies can also accept parameter values. This way you don't have to hard-code things like names into the policy itself. So it lends itself to be modular and reusable. So parameter values then can be fed into a policy. The policy would have been assigned either to a subscription, which means it flows down to everything in that subscription like resource groups and ultimately resources. Also, it could be tied to a specific resource group. It could be tied to a management group. A management group is used to organize multiple subscriptions. And you can also configure an exclusion. So let's say that you've assigned a policy to check for virtual machine disk encryption to the subscription. That flows down to everything in that subscription. But you might want to exclude a resource group where there are virtual machines used for testing purposes. And so they don't need their disks to be encrypted. So you don't want the policy applied there. So you could exclude a resource group within the subscription.
There are a number of Azure Policy effects, such as audit. Which is used for logging where it generates a warning. Or AuditIfNotExists. So this means that if a resource doesn't exist, then auditing would be enabled. DeployIfNotExists, so if a resource doesn't exist, create it. And then deny. So this would be used, for example, to mark non-compliant items as being non-compliant. Now, they wouldn't be deleted, they'd just show up as non-compliant. Such as our example, of using a policy to check for virtual machine disk encryption. So all the machines that are specified as being non-compliant are easily identified.
Then there's the notion of Azure Policy initiatives. This really is essentially a group of policies lumped together. Now why would we do that? Well, because they're related. The policy group or initiative then is assigned just as normally would be done, to a subscription, or a resource group, and so on. So as an example, imagine that we want to be able to harden regional Azure resources. So that might be an initiative. Then we could organize policies within that that would make that happen. Such as to ensure VM disk encryption is enabled. And also ensuring that endpoint protection is enabled. So the initiative would contain those two policies in this example. So it's all about, in this case, security compliance.
You can manage Azure Policies using the portal. You can also do it using the CLI and using PowerShell cmdlets.


Policy Assignment and the Portal
There are many different reasons you would apply policies in an Azure environment. Policies either control what other Azure technicians can do. Such as limiting where certain types of virtual machines can be deployed in terms of regions. Or you might want to check for security compliance for your existing deployed resources. So to get started, here in the portal, I'm going to search for Policy.
And then, I'm going to click on Policy to open up the Policy area.
The first thing I want to do is just take a look at some existing policy Definitions.
There are plenty of pre-built or built-in definitions. Of course, you could also build your own. And they're all listed here, but we can filter them such as by type, whether it's custom or built-in, or by category. For example, if I deselect everything here, and if I were to choose, let's say, Network, then I see policies related only to networking. Or of course, I could select everything in terms of category, and then filter by words, such as the word encrypt. So for example, here we see, we've got options for checking whether or not disk encryption should be applied on virtual machines. That is actually what we're going to do here.
So under the Assignments view on the left, we'll see any policies that were assigned to part of the Azure hierarchy. Whether it's a management group, which is used to organize multiple subscriptions, whether you've assigned a policy to a subscription, or even to a resource group. And of course, if you've assigned a policy to a subscription, it flows down to all resource groups in the subscription. Now, we're going to click Assign policy up at the top here.
And we're going to work with this checking for disk encryption at the VM level. First thing we have to do is determine the scope where we want this policy assignment to take place. It's set by default at the subscription level, but if I click on my options button, the Launch scope selector button on the far right, if I have a management group, which I do, I could assign the policy to a management group.
And we haven't selected the policy yet, but that means the policy, whatever it is, would be applied to all subscriptions that are under the management group. Or we could tie it to a subscription. Or even a specific resource group within the subscription. I want this to be applied at the subscription level. So the policy assignment will flow down to all resource groups under my Pay-As-You-Go subscription, that's fine.
That was the default selection. Now, I could exclude specific resource groups. 
So if I have a resource group that should not have this policy, which we haven't yet selected, applied, I could choose a Resource Group to exclude. I'm not going to do that.
Now, we have to specify the policy definitions. So I'm going to click the selector button to do that.
Now from here, I can filter. So I'm going to type in the word encrypt. And I'm interested in the one that we looked at previously, Disk encryption should be applied on virtual machines. So basically, in this particular example, I'm assigning a policy that's really used to check for compliance, in this case, at the security configuration level. I'm going to go ahead and select that.
There are many other policies we could have chosen, but this is what I'm using in this example.
So I want to make sure that this policy is enforced, and I'm going to click the Review + create button.
There's really nothing else I want to do here, so I'm going to create this assignment by clicking the Create button. We can now see that the assignment succeeded.
So we now have our disk encryption being checked on virtual machine disks being applied to the subscription scope, the Pay-As-You-Go subscription. And at this point, we can then wait for that to happen. Now, how long does that take to happen? Can we force it along? No, you cannot. So we can take a minimum of 15 minutes, and depending on how many virtual machines you have in your subscription, actually, really depends on how many objects you have deployed in your subscription, it can take longer. So the more objects, the longer it takes. But at any point in time, you can come back and you could check the Compliance view to see if it's yet completed doing its search for virtual machines. And we can see here, our assignment is listed here, hasn't even started.
So it hasn't even checked virtual machines to look at their compliance state.


Policy Assignment and the CLI
You can use the Azure CLI to manage policies.
Here in the Azure portal, I've already opened up policies, where we can go and take a look at policy Definitions.
Now this is in the GUI console. Of course, we can view policy definitions as well in the CLI. But before we do that, here in the portal we can also view policy Assignments, of which we have one for disk encryption being checked at the Pay-As-You-Go subscription Scope level.
Let's open up Cloud Shell and let's explore this just a little bit.
The first thing I'll do here in the Cloud Shell is I'm going to type az policy -h for help to see what the next level commands would be.
Such as assignment, if I want to create a policy assignment as opposed to working with policy definitions. So I'm going to run cls to clear the screen and az policy assignment -h.
From here, we'll then see the next level commands after that, such as creating an assignment.
So we can learn more about that, I'll just use the up-arrow key here, by changing this to az policy assignment create -h for help once again. And then we're seeing some details about what we would do to actually create a policy assignment, along with some examples of how that would actually be done.
Now having done that, let's take a look at a few other things related to policies, such as az policy definition list.
So I want to list policy definitions the way we looked at the policy definitions view in the GUI.
Now there are quite a few of them and each of them has quite a few properties, as we can see here, so the listing can be somewhat long. What we can do is query the output of this using the cli --query parameter.
So in other words, let's bring up that previous command, let's use the up-arrow key, az policy definition list. But this time, what I'm going to do is use --query. And I'm going to put in open and closing square bracket, which indicates that we have an array of items. There's multiple policy definitions. Dot. And the property I'm interested in is displayName, where name has a capital N. This is only going to show me the names of the policies as opposed to all of the details for each of them.
And we can see as we scroll back up through the output that there are quite a few of them. Now having done that, I'm just going to clear the screen here for one second. We can also view policy assignments.
So I could run az policy assignment list. We'll see any assigned policies.
Here we've got one that's assigned for checking disk encryption, and we can see when it was created, who was it assigned by, and we have all of those details. Now we could also specifically ask for that information, meaning we could ask for specific assignments at a specific scope level.
So for example, we're going to run az policy assignment list and I'm going to use --scope. And what I've put in double quotes here is a reference to my subscription ID. So I want to see any assignments made at the subscription level.
Now we're going to see the same kind of output because I only have one assignment. But nonetheless, it is showing us our disk encryption should be applied on virtual machines assignment. Let's just minimize the Cloud Shell here and verify this.
So we do see that we have our disk encryption policy here, this assignment made at the Pay-As-You-Go subscription level.


Policy Assignment and PowerShell
Here in the Azure portal, we know that we can go into the Policy tool and go to the Assignments view to assign a policy at a given scope, whether it's a subscription, resource group, and whatnot.
However, we can also do that in PowerShell.
So the first thing I'm going to do here is I'm going to create a variable called $rg for resource group. And I'm going to store in that the result of get-azresource group, and the name is going to be rg1. So if I do $rg, we can see it's got a reference to my resource group.
The next thing I want to do is create a variable to store the definition of a policy.
So to do that, I've created a $definition variable, and it will store the result of running Get-AzPolicyDefinition, which I am then piping to Where-Object.
Now I've got the space backtick here to wrap that to the next line. Where-Object then has an expression, where we're looking at the display name of each policy definition until we find one that equals Audit VMs that do not use managed disks.
So Where-Object is a filtering type of cmdlet, so I've got the open and the closing curly brace and within my expression. The $_ is a built-in PowerShell variable. It's a placeholder that allows you to process a collection of items. Here the collection of items is the collection of policy definitions. And then from there, we can call upon the .Properties.DisplayName property. Now after we've done that, we should have the policy definition for Audit VMs that do not use managed disks stored in our dollar sign definition variable. There are some warning messages here about some changes taking place with these PowerShell cmdlets, and that's fine. What I want to do then is clear the screen and let's just see what's in $definition.
Looks good. Looks like we've got the definition of a policy. So the next order of business is to assign that policy.
To do that, I'm going to use the New-AzPolicyAssignment cmdlet. And I'm going to assign a name. It's going to be called VMs-ManagedDisks, and the DisplayName, Check for VM Managed Disks, then -Scope. And I'm going to reference my variable $rg. It points to resource group one. And within that, I'll call upon the ResourceID property. So that's what I'm going to do to set the scope of where that policy should be applied. And then, of course, I have to tell it the policy definition using -PolicyDefinition and I'll use our $definition variable. Again, we've got a few warnings as these cmdlets are always changing.
But in the end, the assignment should have taken place. Now, we can take a look at that even in the portal to see if that's true. So we're already in the Assignments view.
If I do a Refresh, then we should see that there it is right there, Check for VM Managed Disks. And it's applied not just to the subscription, but rather to a resource group, Rg1, within the subscription.


Custom Policies
Although there are many built-in policies that you can assign in Azure, such as for checking security compliance, like checking if virtual machines have disk encryption enabled. Or for doing other things like limiting which types of virtual machines can be created in certain regions. There are times you might need to build your own custom policy. 
To do that here in the portal, I'm going to search for Policy to open up the Policy tool.
Now in the Policy tool, if I go to Definitions, I'll see a list of all of the policy definitions that are available.
I can filter it so that, for example, I can view only Custom policies. Now there are none, at least not yet. We're going to add a custom policy definition by clicking the add Policy definition button up above.
Now when I do that, I have to fill in a few items. Notably, I have to specify the actual policy rule in JSON format.
So I've placed my own custom JSON text here. So I've got a policyRule and what we're looking at is when we have a resource deployment occurring, we want to check to see if any tags have been applied. So if tags haven't been applied, so exists false, then the effect is going to be append, we want to append some tags. So to the tags field, I want to add costCenter with a value of yhz. Now this is a way that we could enforce some consistency to a degree when it comes to adding tags to newly created resources. 
So to create this custom policy, first of all, I'm going to define the location at the top, as let's say subscription level.  
And I'm going to call this name, Add Cost Center Tag. And down below, I'm going to apply it to an existing category. These are categories of policy definitions, let's say Tags.
And of course, we have our rule listed down below.
And that's it. I'm going to scroll down at the bottom, and I'm going to click Save to save this custom policy definition. which, as we can see now, is clearly shown here.
Now we can use this for assignments. 
So for example, if I go to the Assignments view, we can then actually assign that custom policy. 
So I could choose Assign policy, just like we normally would with a built-in policy. The only difference is, we're going to select our custom policy. So for Policy definition down below because you might have quite a large list, you might want to filter it by Custom.
 There it is, Add Cost Center Tag.
I can select that and I can decide where I want that applied.
So let's say for example, we want to change it from the subscription to a resource group.
So I can go back to my Scope selector. And within my subscription, maybe I'll apply that to a specific resource group where we might deploy resources.
And I'll go ahead and select that.
And at this point, I'm going to click Review + create and then I will create the policy assignment.
Now the next thing we'll do is just test that out by creating something in that resource group.  
So let's just go Home, let's choose Create a resource.
Let's say it's going to be a storage account, so I'm going to type in storage account.
We'll select that. We're going to choose Create, and at this point we're going to go through and just basically create a very simple storage account.
 I'll deploy it into resource group 1 because that's where a policy applies.
And I'll just give it a unique name that I know won't be used by anything else.
And really that's about it.
 All I really want to do is create the storage account. 
So I'm just going to go right to the review and create it.  
Now back here in the Policy tool, if I look at the Compliance view, make sure you track that assignment.
Right now, it currently says it's not yet been started. These things can take a little bit of time before they kick in. So as we keep clicking Refresh, we can see for our Add Cost Centre Tag policy that we've got a Compliance state now of Non-compliant.
Currently, it's 18 out of 24 resources, so 75%. However, if we keep clicking Refresh, that will change as it keeps evaluating the resources in our subscription to see which ones do not have that specific cost center tag. 
So, we can click directly on that custom assignment to open that up and view the details about it. Such as scrolling down to see a list of the non-compliant resources. In this case, that do not have the cost center tag applied.


Policy Compliance
While you can use Azure Policies to limit resource management in the Azure environment, you can also use it to check for compliance, such as with security standards.
To get started here in the portal, I'm going to search for Policy up in the top bar. And I'm going to open up the Policy tool, where the first thing we should do is look at any existing policy assignments.
Now bear in mind that when you make a policy assignment, such as at the subscription level for that type of scope.
Depending on how many objects are in your subscription will determine how long it takes before you can expect compliance reports. So for example, we've got an assignment here for a policy called Disk encryption should be applied on virtual machines. That's been applied at the Pay-As-You-Go subscription level.
So when we go to the Compliance view, if it's not yet had time to run we have to just wait and click on Refresh until such time we start getting some information. So for example, we can see the Disk encryption should be applied on virtual machines compliance report here for the Pay-As-You-Go subscription. And currently the Compliance state is Non-compliant. So 0 out of 1. So it means we have zero out of one applicable item that are compliant with that.
So if we take a look at that by opening it up, opening up the assignment details. Then when we scroll down towards the bottom, we'll see the offender. So what is the one item that was not compliant? Well, in this case we're talking about disk encryption, which applies to a virtual machine, shows us the name of the virtual machine. And we can see the Compliance state for it is that it's Non-compliant.
Now if we click on the Details link for that, we'll get a bit more insight as to what's going on.
So here it says, No related resources match the effect details in the policy definition. In this case, looking for encrypted disks.
So by viewing these compliance reports, we can determine whether certain machines are compliant with security standards such as this one. And if not, we know where to focus our energy to bring those devices into compliance.


Policy Remediation
You can configure remediation tasks for certain types of Azure Policies when it comes to non-compliant resources.
An example of this would be a custom policy that uses the modify policy effect. Let's take a look at this here in the portal. I'm going to start by going to the Azure Policy tool.
And we'll first start by looking at an existing definition for a custom built policy.
So I'm going to change the Type drop-down list here on the right to Custom, there it is. Add Cost Center Tag, going to click to open up that custom policy definition, and let's take a look at the definition down below.
What's happening is we're looking for a tag in resources called CostCenter.
Now, depending on where we assign this policy will determine what it's going to look at.
Is it going to look at all resources in the subscription or just certain ones in a resource group? Depends on where this custom policy is assigned at which scope level. So if there is not a CostCenter tag, so if that works out to be false, what should we do?
Well, we want to add a CostCenter tag with an appropriate value. So then the effect is modify. 
And what we want to do is make sure that we add a specific tag, in this case the CostCenter tag, with the value of YHZ.
Now, this will certainly apply to newly created resources, they will automatically have this tag added. But for existing ones, we'd have to check the compliance. So let's see what that looks like. 

[Video description begins] The Add Cost Center Tag blade closes. [Video description ends]

Let's close out of here, and let's go back to our Compliance view over here on the left, where we can see our Add Cost Center Tag has been applied to the Pay-As-You-Go or subscription scope.

[Video description begins] He clicks the Compliance option in the navigation pane and the Policy | Compliance page opens. It includes the table with six columns and several rows. The column headers include Name, Scope, and Compliance state. [Video description ends]

And we can see that currently the state is Non-compliant, 0 out of 34 resources are compliant with that. So if we click on that, we'll be able to see the resources in question. In this case, it's going to be any resource that does not have that tag value.

[Video description begins] He clicks the row with row entry labeled “Non-compliant” under the Compliance state column header. The Assignment Details blade opens. It includes tabs called "Resource compliance", "Events", "Remediation tasks". The Resource compliance tab is selected. It includes a table with seven columns and several rows. The column headers include Name, Compliance state, Resource Type, Location, Scope, and Last evaluated. [Video description ends]

So, CostCenter with a value of YHZ. We can scroll down and we can see the identity of those specific resources. So for example, the first one is a virtual machine called winsrv2019-1. Over on the far right, if I click the three dots button, I can select the Compliance reason to see why it's not compliant.

[Video description begins] A blade called "Compliance details" opens. [Video description ends]

It's not compliant because the CostCenter tag doesn't even have a value, so there's nothing there. It needs to have a value of YHZ. 

[Video description begins] He closes the Compliance details blade. [Video description ends]

So what I can do is create a remediation task by clicking that button of the same name up here at the top. 

[Video description begins] A blade called "New remediation task" opens. It includes table with four columns and several rows. The column headers are Name, Resource Type, Location and Scope. [Video description ends]

When you create a remediation task, you are remediating in alignment with what that policy says should exist. In this case, that's the Add Cost Center Tag policy that wants the CostCenter tag with the value of YHZ to be applied. So we have a list of the resources here in our subscription that really need to be remediated and have that item added, that tag. So I'm going to go ahead and click the Remediate button at the bottom. And we can see a remediation task has successfully been created.

[Video description begins] The New remediation task blade closes. The Assignment Details blade opens. The Remediation tasks tab is open. It includes a table with six columns and several rows. The column headers include Last Updated, Remediation State, Policy Definition, Scope, Locations, and Remediated Resources. [Video description ends]

And it shows it here, when we're looking at our Policy compliance, we can see under the Remediation tasks tab that it's currently In Progress. So back here in our Compliance view, if we click Refresh, we can see that for our Add Cost Center Tag custom policy, the non-compliant state is changing.

[Video description begins] The Policy | Compliance page opens. [Video description ends]

 It will take a bit of time, we can keep on clicking the Refresh button. But now we've got 86% resource compliance. 

[Video description begins] He clicks the Add Cost Center Tag row entry under the Name column header. The Assignment Details blade opens. [Video description ends]

So if I click to open that up, let's go back and take a peek at the status of our remediation task. So if go to the Remediation tasks, we can see its Complete.

[Video description begins] He clicks the Remediation tasks tab. [Video description ends]

And if I clicked on it, then we'll be able to see some further detail.

[Video description begins] A blade called "Remediation task" opens. It includes a table with seven columns and several rows. The column headers include Name, Resource Type, Location, Scope, Deployment Id, and Related events. [Video description ends]

Now just because it's complete, it doesn't mean that every resource in the subscription has been modified to be compliant. It means that it's complete in that the instructions have been sent, it just might not completely be done. So here we can see the resources against which that modify effect for adding that tag value has succeeded. So for example, for vnet1, a virtual network, let's take a look at that. If we actually click to open up that resource, did it or did it not automatically tag it?

[Video description begins] He clicks a row entry labeled “vnet1” under the Name column header. A page called "Vnet1" opens. It is divided into two parts. The first part is a navigation pane. The second part is a content pane. [Video description ends]

Let's take a look. So I'm going to go Tags.

[Video description begins] He clicks an option called "Tags" in the navigation pane and a page called "Vnet1 | Tags" opens. [Video description ends]

Now if there were any tags here already, we'll see those in addition to the new one. And it looks good. We apparently had a tag here called Project with the value of ABC. And now we can see CostCenter: YHZ has been added. And this is a result of having created a remediation task.

                    
Azure AD Role Overview
In Azure Role-Based Access Control, otherwise called RBAC is a way to delegate permissions to others to manage Azure resources.  

[Video description begins] Azure Role-based Access Control (RBAC). [Video description ends]

There are a number of built in roles that you can select from or you can define your own custom roles if they don't suit your needs. Some examples of built in roles include the owner role.

[Video description begins] Azure Built-in RBAC Roles. [Video description ends]

Now if you have the owner role, you have full resource management control of all resources in Azure. We haven't yet talked about the scope of where that applies, but unto itself that's what it means. Think of an RBAC role as being a collection of related permissions. You've got the contributor role. So resource control, other than changing RBAC access. Reader role, which implies read-only access. Other examples would include CDN endpoint reader for Content Delivery Network endpoint reader. So you can read endpoints. But that's it, can you configure them. Cost Management contributors you can read and write Azure cost configurations including working with budgets, virtual machine administrator login as it implies. You can read VMs in the portal and login with admin credentials.

[Video description begins] Azure Custom RBAC Role Process. [Video description ends]

Now there are many more built in roles than that, that's just to give us a sampling of what we might expect. But you can also work with custom roles. Maybe you need one role that combines virtual machine and cost management permissions for example. So what you would do is create a custom JSON role file, this is just a text file that uses JSON syntax. You have to know what that syntax is to properly define the role, and then you can create the role from that file. For example in PowerShell, you can do that with the New-AzRoleDefinition cmdlet, or in the CLI you might use AZ role definition create.

[Video description begins] Azure Custom RBAC Role JSON File. Several lines of code are displayed. [Video description ends]

Working with a custom RBAC role file uses JSON syntax, you could even type this into your favorite text editor, it doesn't matter. But notice we've got the opening and closing curly braces at the very top and the very bottom. And the first item we see defined here is the "Name": custom VM roles It's got its own ID, the IsCustom flag third line down is set to true. We have a Description, and then we have a collection of actions. What are the permissions grouped together here within this role? So it looks like we have a bunch of read access to all items indicated with the asterisk in storage, network and compute, and then the ability to start and restart virtual machines. So this is what we would see within a custom RBAC role definition file.
Now we can assign roles, whether they're built in or custom at a variety of levels within the hierarchy in Azure. But before we get to that, let's talk about which principals we can assign it to. You can assign roles to users individually, but it's normally easier to do it on a group level. So you just add members to the group, they get the permissions for the roles assigned to the group. You could also do it for service principles. Think of a service principle as being kind of a dummy user account used by software. It's not actually user logging in, it's a software component that might require access, let's say, to some other resource like a storage account.
Then you've got managed identities. Now, this is something this is a built in type of security principle that's managed automatically by Azure. So this would be used for example, when if you're a software developer, you building custom solutions in Azure that need to authenticate to certain Azure services. So depending on what you're working with, will determine whether Azure creates the managed identity or not. So let's say that we've assigned a role to a group.
Where does that apply in the Azure hierarchy? Well, we can assign that at the subscription level, which means that the group members would have those permissions from the role for everything in the entire subscription, it flows down through the hierarchy down to resource groups and down to individual resources in resource groups. However, you could also assign RBAC roles to a specific resource group. And naturally those permissions would only apply for resources in the resource group. And if you need to be very granular, you can also assign it to a specific resource. So let's say you need to allow a virtual machine login for a group for one particular virtual machine. You can certainly do that by assigning the scope for that particular virtual machine resource.
Pictured on the screen we have a screenshot that shows us how inheritance works in the portal. So in the upper left, notice that we're looking at a resource group called Rg1. And if you look in the navigation panel, the Access Control (IAM) blade has been selected. That's what we're seeing on the right, we are viewing the permissions. And over on the right we can see Network Contributor which is a role has been assigned to a Group. That's called Central_Region_Canada and that was applied at this resource. Remember this resource is the Rg1 resource group. So the members of that group will have the network contributor role for resources in Rg1. Down below notice the Owner role, which was assigned to the Azure_Admins Group. Now, these groups are Azure AD groups. Notice over to the far right it says that that was (Inherited) from the Subscription level. So it's inherited from above but it's still applies here.


Azure AD Role Portal Assignment
You can use the Azure Portal to assign roles and also to view where the roles are effective. 
We're talking about Role-Based Access Control, or RBAC. So to get started here in the portal, I'm going to search for subscription, and I'm going to go to the subscription level, because I want to start by applying a role there.
Then we can examine how those permissions flow down the hierarchy, that means to resource groups within the subscription and within resource groups to individual resources. So let's start by opening up a subscription.
Now when you want to assign RBAC roles, regardless of which level you're doing it at, you always go into the properties of the item, in this case, the Subscription. And in the navigation bar, you click on Access control (IAM). Now from here, you'll be able to see any role assignments.
You can choose to View role assignments.
So if I click View, I can see that listed over here on the right, but I can also +Add role assignments, which we're going to do. So I'm going to click +Add, Add a role assignment. And the first thing I need to do is select the appropriate Role.
I can choose from the alphabetical list of role names. And bear in mind that a role is really just a collection of related permissions. So what I'm going to do is type in the word virtual just to filter this out. And we'll see here we've got a Virtual Machine Contributor role, which allows with the creation of virtual machines and management of them. So I'm going to leave that as the Role.
Now I can assign the access to Azure AD users, groups, or service principals.
So what I'm going to do here is take a look for a group by the name of east. And sure enough, I have an existing Azure AD group I've created previously called EastAdmins. I want to assign this role to that group. So EastAdmins is now showing up down below as a selected member.
I'm going to save that.
Now at this point, we want to check our work right here at this level, at the subscription level. So I'm just going to scroll over a little bit to the right so we can kind of see everything, including our scroll bar. And at the subscription level, notice for the Virtual Machine Contributor role, EastAdmins is part of that. And we can see that that is a Group and that it was assigned at the Scope of This resource. Now why don't we take a look at a resource group somewhere within the Subscriptions.
So for that I'm just going to go to Home, actually, I'll just open up my navigation bar on the left, and I'll just choose Resource groups.

[Video description begins] A page called "Resource groups" opens. It includes a table with three columns and five rows. The column headers are Name, Subscription, and Location. [Video description ends]

I'm going to open up the properties of an existing Resource group.

[Video description begins] He clicks a row entry called “Rg1” under the Name column header and its corresponding blade opens. It is divided into two parts: navigation pane and content pane. [Video description ends]

And we know that to get to the RBAC portion of that item, we need to click on Access control (IAM), so I'm going to do that.

[Video description begins] The corresponding page opens in the content pane. [Video description ends]

Now I don't want to make a role assignment here, what I want to do is View role assignments, so I'm going to click the View button. And I'm just going to scroll over just a little bit so we can see what's happening here.

[Video description begins] The Role assignments tab opens in the content pane. [Video description ends]

And as I scroll down, notice that EastAdmins has the Virtual Machine Contributor role that is effective here in my resource group. However, it says Inherited, and it was inherited from the Subscription level. So why don't we go into an object within this resource group to take a peek.

[Video description begins] The corresponding page opens in the content pane. [Video description ends]

So for example, if I click on Overview here for the resource group, one of the things I'll be able to do is see the resources down below that are in that resource group. It doesn't matter which one I pick. I'm just going to click on this network security group to open it up.

[Video description begins] He clicks a row entry called “NSG-Windows” and its corresponding blade opens. It is divided into two parts: navigation pane and content pane. [Video description ends]

And as is the case with what we've been looking at so far to get to the RBAC section, we click Access control (IAM), so this is for an individual resource.

[Video description begins] The corresponding page opens. [Video description ends]

Let's View the role assignments over on the right, and we'll see, of course, that Virtual Machine Contributor EastAdmins is shown here with inheritance coming from the Subscription level.

[Video description begins] The Role assignments tab opens. [Video description ends]

So that's all that we need to do to be able to grant permissions to Azure resources through the use of roles in the portal.


Azure AD Role CLI Assignment
RBAC roles can be assigned using the Azure CLI.
Here in the portal I'm going to click on Cloud Shell to start up the CLI, and I'm going to start by creating a role assignment using az role assignment create.

[Video description begins] A command prompt window called "PowerShell" opens in the web portal. The following prompt is displayed: PS /home/danlachance72>. [Video description ends]

The first thing I have to do is specify the name of the role that I want to grant, in this case --role and in quotes, "SQL DB contributor". I then have to determine who the assignee is with the --assignee parameter who you assigning this to. Now it could be a service principle and Azure AD group, in this case, it's an Azure AD user, specifically jhill. And then I've got the full email address or user name of that account. I want to make sure that the SQL DB contributor role is assigned to jhill, and I want the scope to be a resource group. So --resource-group, and Rg1. Could go ahead and press Enter to create that role assignment.

[Video description begins] He executes the following command: az role assignment create --role "SQL DB Contributor" --assignee jhill@quick24x7test.onmicrosoft.com --resource-group Rg1. The output displays several lines of code. The prompt does not change. [Video description ends]

And it looks like it's good. We've got some returned JSON, and we can check our work here in the portal. Let's just minimize this.

[Video description begins] He switches back to the Microsoft Azure web portal. He clicks an option called "Resource groups" and a page called "Resource groups" opens. [Video description ends]

Let's go into the Rg1 Resource group to see if user J Hill is shown there with the SQL DB Contributor role.

[Video description begins] He clicks a link called "Rg1" and the corresponding blade opens. It is divided into two parts: navigation pane and content pane. [Video description ends]

 So I'm going to go to Access control (IAM) for Rg1.

[Video description begins] He clicks an option called "Access control (IAM)" in the navigation pane. The corresponding page opens in the content pane. [Video description ends]

And what we want to do in there is View the role assignments, so I'll just go ahead and click on that, scroll over a little bit and let's go down and take a peek.

[Video description begins] He clicks a button called "View" in the content pane. The Role assignments tab opens. [Video description ends]

Sure enough their SQL DB Contributor and Jen Hill is a member of that role at this level, This resource. It wasn't inherited from the subscription, so let's go back into the CLI.

[Video description begins] He switches back to the PowerShell command prompt window. [Video description ends]

So I can also view assignments from within here, of course as you might imagine, so az role assignment list --, let's say resource group rg1 since that's what we just looked at in the portal.

[Video description begins] He executes the following command: cls. The screen gets cleared and the prompt does not change. [Video description ends]

And we can see here that user principalName J Hill is assigned here.

[Video description begins] He executes the following command: az role assignment list --resource-group rg1. The output displays several lines of code. The prompt does not change. [Video description ends]

And we can also see that the roleDefinitionName is SQL DB Contributor, and this is for the resource group of course Rg1 that we asked for, up above in the command line.

[Video description begins] He points to the output. [Video description ends]

We can also remove role assignments from here as well.

[Video description begins] He clears the screen and the prompt does not change. [Video description ends]

To do that I would use the az role assignment delete command syntax. I need to specify the assignee, so --assignee, and it's going to be the user we just added here in this example, jhill. And have to specify the role because she might be assigned with multiple roles at that level, so --role SQL DB Contributor. And the scope where that was applied, that I want to remove it from, is the Rg1 resource group. So let's go ahead and press Enter. Now, that's going to remove that role assignment.

[Video description begins] He executes the following command: az role assignment delete --assignee jhill@quick24x7test.onmicrosoft.com --role "SQL DB Contributor" --resource-group Rg1. No output is displayed and the prompt does not change. [Video description ends]

So I'm just going to use the up arrow key, back to where we were listing role assignments for resource group 1, or Rg1. And notice now nothing is returned.


Azure AD Role PowerShell Assignment
PowerShell cmdlets can be used to manage RBAC role assignments. Here in the portal, I'm going to launch the Cloud Shell to access those PowerShell cmdlets.

[Video description begins] The Microsoft Azure web portal opens. He clicks an icon called “Cloud Shell” and the PowerShell command prompt window opens. The following prompt is displayed: PS /home/danlachance72>. [Video description ends]

The first thing I'm going to do is create a new role assignment. Now to do that, I'm going to use the New-AzRoleAssignment PowerShell cmdlet. I'm going to use the -SignInName parameter. And I'm going to assign this to an Azure AD user jhill@quick24x7test.onmicrosoft.com. Now I could also apply this to a service principle in Azure AD or a group. But in this case, it's an individual Azure AD user. I have to specify the RoleDefinitionName, so I'll specify that parameter. In this example, it's going to be the SQL DB Contributor. And as we know when we work with RBAC, we have to determine the scope where the assignee can exercise those privileges. In this case -ResourceGroupName, Rg1. I could specify a subscription or an individual resource, here I want it done at the resource group level. So I'm going to go ahead and press Enter.

[Video description begins] He executes the following command: New-AzRoleAssignment -SignInName jhill@quick24x7test.onmicrosoft.com -RoleDefinitionName "SQL DB Contributor" -ResourceGroupName Rg1. The output displays the details of the role assignment. The prompt does not change. [Video description ends]

Now we can verify this using PowerShell cmdlets. So I'm just going to clear the screen and what we're going to do, is we're going to retrieve role assignments for Rg1 for that user.

[Video description begins] He executes the following command: cls. The screen gets cleared and the prompt does not change. [Video description ends]

To do that, I'm going to use Get-AzRoleAssignment -ResourceGroupName is Rg1, that's where we just assigned it. -SignInName is going to be our user J Hill. Let's go ahead and press Enter and see what it returns.

[Video description begins] He executes the following command: Get-AzRoleAssignment -ResourceGroupName Rg1 -SignInName jhill@quick24x7test.onmicrosoft.com. The output displays the details of the role assignment. The prompt does not change. [Video description ends]

So we're seeing that user Jen Hill has been assigned the SQL DB Contributor role. And of course we asked for this at the Rg1 resource group level so she has those permissions for SQL database deployments within the Rg1 resource group. Now naturally, we need to know how to be able to remove role assignments using PowerShell.

[Video description begins] He clears the screen and the prompt does not change. [Video description ends]

We know how to add them and check them, what about removing them? We do that with the Remove-AzRoleAssignment PowerShell cmdlet. As you might expect, in this case, we're going to use -SignInName and specify our Azure AD user sign in name, the email address. I'm going to specify the role with -RoleDefinitionName. It's going to be SQL DB Contributor. And I have to apply that to a scope. Where do you want to remove that from? Well, that would be -ResourceGroupName of Rg1, so I'm going to go ahead and press Enter to remove the role assignment.

[Video description begins] He executes the following command: Remove-AzRoleAssignment -SignInName jhill@quick24x7test.onmicrosoft.com -RoleDefinitionName "SQL DB Contributor" -ResourceGroupName Rg1. No output is displayed and the prompt does not change. [Video description ends]

We're going to check our work. I'll use the up arrow key to bring up previous commands.

[Video description begins] He executes the following command: Get-AzRoleAssignment -ResourceGroupName Rg1 -SignInName jhill@quick24x7test.onmicrosoft.com. No output is displayed and the prompt does not change. [Video description ends]

Up to where we get back to Get-AzRoleAssignment and when I press Enter, nothing is returned because user J Hill no longer has that role assigned in Rg1.

Azure AD Custom Roles

[Video description begins] Topic title: Azure AD Custom Roles. The presenter is Dan Lachance. [Video description ends]

If the built in roles for RBAC in Azure don't meet your needs, you can then define your own custom roles in a JSON formatted file as I've got open here. So it's a JSON formatted file, it's just a text file really.

[Video description begins] He opens a WordPad file called "Create_Custom_Role.json". It contains several lines of code. [Video description ends]

I've got the opening and the closing curly braces. And here, I'm defining the Name of my custom role to be Custom - Network Resource Reader. IsCustom is set to true and I've also got a description here that says, Ability to view network resources. Then you have to define what this role's actions are, what can someone do in terms of permissions if they are assigned this role. So here for actions, I'm specifying Microsoft.Network/*, so all Microsoft Network types of resources in Azure, but the ability to only read them, read.

There are no definitions for NotActions, only actions that we want to allow. And for the AssignableScopes here, I've set it at the subscription level with the ID of my Azure subscription. So now, how do we take this and create a custom role? Well, there are a number of ways that that can be done. We can do this in PowerShell and that's actually what I'm going to do here. So the next thing I need to do is launch the Cloud Shell so I can get to a place where I can issue PowerShell commands.

[Video description begins] He opens the Microsoft Azure web portal. He clicks the Cloud Shell icon and the PowerShell command prompt window opens. The following prompt is displayed: PS /home/danlachance72>. [Video description ends]

So I'm going to go ahead and launch Cloud Shell. Now, the first thing I have to think about is that the file that we just looked at for our custom JSON role definition was on-premises. I need to get it up here in the cloud in Cloud Shell. So I've got this button at the top here in the bar where I can upload and download files. I'm going to go ahead and click Upload/Download files, and then I'll choose Upload. So I've specified my file and it looks like the upload has completed. So the first time you open Cloud Shell, you're asked to set up storage. And this is one of the reasons so you can have persistent storage of items that you might deal with, in this case, a file I've uploaded. If I do dir, I can see indeed, there's the Create_Custom_Role.json file that we were just looking at in WordPad just a few minutes ago.

[Video description begins] He executes the following command: dir. The output displays a list of files in the directory. The prompt does not change. [Video description ends]

So what I want to do then is I want to make sure I create a new role from this. So I'm going to do that with the new-azroledefinition PowerShell cmdlet. I'm going to pass it the -inputfile parameter with the value of, in this case, create. And I can even use my tab completion to spell out the rest of it since I'm in the same subdirectory. Let's see what happens. I'm going to go ahead and press Enter to create this custom role, and it should be done.

[Video description begins] He executes the following command: new-azroledefinition -inputfile ./Create_Custom_Role.json. The output displays the details of the newly created role. The prompt does not change. [Video description ends]

Now, we can check this here in the portal. So again, it's called Custom - Network Resource Reader. So let's say we were going to go to the subscription level and apply that role.

[Video description begins] He switches back to the Microsoft Azure web portal. He clicks an option called "Subscriptions". A page called "Subscriptions" opens. [Video description ends]

So I'm going to go into my subscription.

[Video description begins] He clicks a row entry labeled "Pay-As-You-Go". A blade called "Pay-As-You-Go" opens. [Video description ends]

We know that in the GUI when you want to work with RBAC, you go into Access control (IAM). So I'm going to do that.

[Video description begins] He clicks an option called "Access control (IAM)" in the navigation pane and the corresponding page opens in the content pane. [Video description ends]

And one of the things that we're going to do here is click +Add, Add role assignment.

[Video description begins] The corresponding page opens. [Video description ends]

And, we have a unified drop down list here of both built in and custom roles. Now remember, our role starts with the word custom. And you can actually select it from the list, or you can even filter the list if you so choose.

[Video description begins] He clicks a drop-down list box called “Role”. [Video description ends]

So if I type in custom, we can see right away, Custom - Network Resource Reader. That's the role we just created. And we can see the description here, Ability to view network resources. That's what we've just created. Now, you can also remove that from PowerShell. So let me just go back here into PowerShell.

[Video description begins] He closes the page. He switches back to the PowerShell command prompt window. [Video description ends]

Let's get rid of that.

[Video description begins] He executes the following command: cls. The screen gets cleared and the prompt does not change. [Video description ends]

I'm going to run get-azroledefinition, and I'm going to specify the name of it, which is going to be Custom - Network Resource Reader, the spaces between those items. Now when I do that, all it does is return that yes, that role is there, that definition exists. So I'm going to bring up that command again with the up arrow key.

[Video description begins] He executes the following command: get-azroledefinition -name "Custom - Network Resource Reader". The output displays the details of the role. The prompt does not change. [Video description ends]

What I want to do is pipe the result of that to the remove-azroledefinition cmdlet. So we're going to retrieve that specific role and pass it through and delete it. Are you sure you want to do, or we can actually suppress that message.

[Video description begins] He executes the following command: get-azroledefinition -name "Custom - Network Resource Reader" | remove-azroledefinition. A confirmation message appears. [Video description ends]

Let me just Control+C out of there.

[Video description begins] He clears the screen and the prompt does not change. [Video description ends]

So, if I bring back that full command again, I can just add -force, if I could spell that over correctly over here. And it will suppress that message so it will remove that role.

[Video description begins] He executes the following command: get-azroledefinition -name "Custom - Network Resource Reader" | remove-azroledefinition -force. No output is displayed and the prompt does not change. [Video description ends]

So if we use our up arrow key to go back a little bit, where we were getting that role definition, it no longer exists.

[Video description begins] He executes the following command: get-azroledefinition -name "Custom - Network Resource Reader". No output is displayed and the prompt does not change. [Video description ends]

Resource Locking Overview

[Video description begins] Topic title: Resource Locking Overview. The presenter is Dan Lachance. [Video description ends]

The purpose of Microsoft Azure resource locks is to control when others can modify or delete Azure resources of any type, whether that's intentional or unintentional.

[Video description begins] Azure Resource Locks. [Video description ends]

So it's a way to basically check out a resource, so to speak. And while it's checked out, in a manner of speaking, it can't be either modified or it can't be entirely deleted. We can set resource locks at the subscription level. And similar to how you apply RBAC roles at the subscription level and it flows down to everything in the subscription, like resource groups and resources, the same thing is true with Azure resource locks. If you set a resource lock at the subscription level, it will flow down to resource groups and resources. You could, of course, apply an Azure resource lock initially at the resource group level, or you might lock an individual resource such as a storage account, to prevent the modification of its properties. Now you can set the Azure resource lock to be read-only.

[Video description begins] Azure Resource Lock Levels. [Video description ends]

What that means is you are allowing read-only access to the item, so that it can't be reconfigured, so to speak. Or you could set it to not allow deletion or to prevent deletion of the resource.

[Video description begins] Azure Resource Lock Inheritance. [Video description ends]

So the inheritance, as we've mentioned, starts at the subscription level, then applies to resource groups, and then applies to individual resources. Now if you don't want that, in other words, you don't want the locking applying everywhere, simply specify the lock at the resource group or the individual resource level.

[Video description begins] VM and storage account are displayed as the individual resources. [Video description ends]

And you can disable or unlock the subscription, the resource group or the resource, at any point in time, once you've deemed it appropriate to allow modifications or the potential for deletion. Bear in mind that modification and deletion of an Azure resource is only possible anyways if somebody has the appropriate permissions to do so, which is usually granted through RBAC roles.

Resource Locking and the Portal

[Video description begins] Topic title: Resource Locking and the Portal. The presenter is Dan Lachance. [Video description ends]

In Microsoft Azure, a resource is an object that you define in the cloud, such as a virtual machine or a disk that you would attach to a virtual machine or a storage account or a SQL server. Any of those things are resources. And so we have the ability to use the portal to lock resources. Why would you do that? You would do it because you want to prevent either a modification of a resource, you want it to be read-only, or you want to prevent the deletion of it.

[Video description begins] The Microsoft Azure web portal opens. [Video description ends]

So we can set locking at various levels in the Azure hierarchy, such as at the subscription level. Now, that's what I'm going to do.

[Video description begins] He clicks the Subscriptions option and the corresponding page opens.[Video description ends]

For example, here if I go into the subscription, I'll be able to open it up, to reveal its properties, and I am interested primarily in resource locking.

[Video description begins] He clicks the Pay-As-You-Go row entry and the corresponding blade opens. It is divided into two parts: navigation pane and content pane. [Video description ends]

So I'm going to scroll all the way down under Settings where I see Resource locks.

[Video description begins] He clicks an option called "Resource locks" and the corresponding page opens. [Video description ends]

Any existing resource locks at this level will be shown. It says This resource has no locks. Okay, well, I could click +Add, and I could add a lock at this level.

[Video description begins] A section called "Add lock" opens. [Video description ends]

And when I do that, I specify a name and I can determine if it should be a Read-only lock, so to prevent modifications, or if I want to prevent deletions.

[Video description begins] He clicks a button called "Cancel". [Video description ends]

 I'm not going to do that though I could, but I'm not going to. Instead, I'm going to navigate to Resource groups.

[Video description begins] He clicks an option called "Resource groups" from the left-hand navigator and a page called "Resource groups" opens. [Video description ends]

So what I want to do then is take a look at the resource locking options at the Resource group level, which would be inherited by the resources in the Resource group. I'm going to click on my resource group Rg1.

[Video description begins] The corresponding blade opens. It is divided into two parts: navigation pane and content pane. [Video description ends]

And in the Overview blade, one of the things you'll see over on the bottom right are the resources in that resource group. So let's scroll down in the navigation bar and let's take a look at resource locks. So it's listed a little bit differently here. Under Settings, it just says Locks.

[Video description begins] He clicks an option called “Locks” and the corresponding page opens. [Video description ends]

If we take a look, we'll see if there are any locks that have been made here. Now, we've got the Subscription icon where we could take a look at subscription level locks.

[Video description begins] He clicks an icon called "Subscription" and a page called "Resource locks" opens. [Video description ends]

We were just there a few moments ago.

[Video description begins] He clicks a link called “Rg1 | Locks” and the Locks page opens. [Video description ends]

It's just a shortcut to get there. However, we can also add locks at this specific level for this particular Resource group.

[Video description begins] He points to Rg1. [Video description ends]

So that's what I'm going to do. I'm going to click Add. And I'm going to call this, let's say Lock1. And I'm going to set it as a Read-only lock here.

[Video description begins] He clicks a drop-down list box called “Lock type” and selects an option called “Read-only”. [Video description ends]

I could add Notes if I so chose, I don't choose to so I'm just going to click OK. And after a moment, we can see that Lock1 shows up here as Read-only for resource group 1. If I click Subscription once again, then we can see that it shows up at the subscription level and we can see the Scope that it's applied to is only rg1.

[Video description begins] The Resource locks page opens. [Video description ends]

Notice, you can Edit it to change any settings related to that or Delete that lock.

[Video description begins] He switches back to the Locks page. [Video description ends]

 If I go back to the Resource group, you can see the lock here.

[Video description begins] He clicks a link called "Lock1" and a page called "Edit lock" opens. [Video description ends]

And if you click on it, it'll pull up the items where you can modify its settings. But you can't delete it from here, you'd have to go to the subscription level and that's to be expected. Now, let's take a look at some of the resources within Rg1.

[Video description begins] He closes the page. [Video description ends]

We can do that by just scrolling up, clicking Overview. We'll see any resources deployed into this resource group, as we mentioned previously, listed in the bottom right.

[Video description begins] The corresponding page opens. [Video description ends]

For example, here's a resource group called, or pardon me, here's a network security group NSG called NSG-Windows.

[Video description begins] A blade called "NSG-Windows" opens. It is divided into two parts: navigation pane and content pane. [Video description ends]

If I click to open it up, we'll be able to look at the Locks for that particular individual resource.

[Video description begins] He clicks an option called "Locks" in the navigation pane and the corresponding page opens in the content pane. [Video description ends]

When I click Locks here, notice we can see Lock1 is applied Read-only. And it says Parent resource locks, can't edit them here. Click on the locks scope to go to that scope. Okay, so we'd have to go up to in this case rg1 to take a look at it. But interestingly, if we try to delete this resource, so let's say go back to Overview and normally we'll just go to Delete here.

[Video description begins] He clicks an option called "Overview" in the navigation pane and the corresponding page opens in the content pane. He clicks a button called "Delete" and a message box labeled “Delete network security group” opens. [Video description ends]

And normally, if you have the role permissions to do this it would succeed. Let's go ahead and say, Yes get rid of it.

[Video description begins] He clicks a button called “Yes”. [Video description ends]

It says, I can't do it, cannot do it because there is a lock.

[Video description begins] Another message box opens. [Video description ends]

And it's at the Rg1 level. So therefore, that's not going to happen. It's read-only, which will also prevent modifications here to this particular object.

[Video description begins] He clicks an option called "Inbound security rules" and the corresponding page opens. [Video description ends]

So for example, if I go to Inbound security rules, let's say I go to +Add a new rule, we'll just fill in a couple of blanks here really quickly.

[Video description begins] He clicks a button called "Add" and a page called "Add inbound security rule" opens. [Video description ends]

So I'm just going to accept all of the defaults and I'm going to click Add.

[Video description begins] The page closes and a message box opens. [Video description ends]

Well, it didn't even like that. So I can't even modify it, let alone delete it. Bear in mind, we set a read-only type of lock at the resource group level and it's flowing down at the resource level. So to get rid of all of this, what I could do is go up to the subscription level, as we saw because that's where it allows us to actually delete locks.

[Video description begins] He switches back to the Subscriptions page. [Video description ends]

So I'm going to do that, I'm going to go back into my Pay-As-You-Go subscription. And I'm going to scroll down and look at Resource locks.

[Video description begins] He clicks the "Pay-As-You-Go" row entry and the corresponding blade opens. [Video description ends]

And we'll see the resource lock applied at the resource group level.

[Video description begins] He clicks an option called “Resource locks” and the corresponding page opens. [Video description ends]

So I'm just going to take a look at that.

[Video description begins] He clicks the "Lock1" link and the "Edit lock" page opens. [Video description ends]

Now of course, we can only edit what's there, but if we scroll to the right to see what's over on the far end, there's the Delete option.

[Video description begins] He clicks the Cancel button and the page closes. [Video description ends]

So I'm going to press Delete, and now it's gone.

[Video description begins] The Lock1 link is deleted. [Video description ends]

Resource Locking and the CLI

[Video description begins] Topic title: Resource Locking and the CLI. The presenter is Dan Lachance. [Video description ends]

Resource locking can be managed using CLI commands just as well as it can be done using the portal.

[Video description begins] The Microsoft Azure web portal opens. He clicks the Cloud Shell icon and the PowerShell command prompt window opens. The following prompt is displayed: PS /home/danlachance72>. [Video description ends]

So I'm going go into the Azure CLI and I'm going to start by using the az -h command because I don't know what the syntax is. So there's a lot of stuff here, the next level commands after az.

[Video description begins] He executes the following command: az -h. The output displays a group and various commands with their description. The prompt does not change. [Video description ends]

I'm going to guess it might be in the Rs for resource lock, but I don't see anything like that. Okay, not that. I'm going to next guess that it's somewhere in the Ls. Here it is, lock, Manage Azure locks.

[Video description begins] He highlights the following text in the output: lock: Manage Azure locks. He executes the following command: cls. The screen gets cleared and the prompt does not change. [Video description ends]

So therefore, I can do az lock -h to try to figure out how to proceed from here.

[Video description begins] He executes the following command: az lock -h. The output displays the help on the az lock command. The prompt does not change. [Video description ends]

So, to Create a lock, Delete a lock, list locks, and so on. Got it. So, I'm going to run az lock create, and I'm going to create a lock here called Lock2.

[Video description begins] He clears the screen and the prompt does not change. [Video description ends]

And I'm going to set it at the resource group level. I don't have to, I could set it at the subscription level. I could even set it at an individual resource level. But commonly, you would find it would be done at the resource group level, in this case, Rg1. I'm going to specify --lock-type and I'm going to set it to readonly. So I want to prevent modification, which also includes preventing deletion. So it's called Lock2, this looks good.

[Video description begins] He executes the following command: az lock create --name Lock2 --resource-group Rg1 --lock-type readonly. The output displays the details of the lock created. The prompt does not change. [Video description ends]

Let's check it out in the portal to see what it looks like in Rg1. So let's see.

[Video description begins] He switches back to the Microsoft Azure web portal. [Video description ends]

I'm going to go to my navigator up here on the left and go to the Resource groups view, where we are going to see Rg1.

[Video description begins] A page called "Resource groups" opens. [Video description ends]

I'm just going to go ahead and click to open that up.

[Video description begins] A blade called "Rg1" opens. The blade is divided into two parts: navigation pane and content pane. [Video description ends]

Let's go down and check the locks for it shall we. So scroll down and we're going to take a look at the locks, there it is, Locks. And we can see that Lock2 Read-only has been set here.

[Video description begins] He clicks an option called “Locks” under a section called “Settings” in the navigation pane and its corresponding blade opens in the content pane. It includes a table with four columns and one row. The column headers are Lock name, Lock type, Scope, and Notes. [Video description ends]

And again, it's been set at this level rg1. Now of course, if we scroll over to the far right, we can choose to Edit or Delete it. We could also go up to the Subscription level, where we'll see all the locks in the subscription, even if they weren't tied to the subscription levels.

[Video description begins] He clicks a button called "Subscription" and the corresponding page opens. It includes a table with four columns and one row. The column headers are Lock name, Lock type, Scope, and Notes. [Video description ends]

There it is. And from here, we can also Edit and Delete it at that level. But of course, we can also do that in the CLI.

[Video description begins] He switches back to the PowerShell command prompt window. The following prompt is displayed: /home/danlachance72>. [Video description ends]

Back here in the CLI, for example, we might run az lock list.

[Video description begins] He executes the following command: az lock list. The output displays the list. The prompt does not change. [Video description ends]

And here, we'll see that we do have a lock that's applied it's called Lock2, it's been applied to Rg1, and the locking level has been set to ReadOnly.

Resource Locking and PowerShell

[Video description begins] Topic title: Resource Locking and PowerShell. The presenter is Dan Lachance. [Video description ends]

You can use PowerShell cmdlets to manage resource locking in Azure.

[Video description begins] The PowerShell command prompt window opens. The following prompt is displayed: PS /home/danlachance72>. [Video description ends]

To get started here in PowerShell, I'm going to run get command and I'm going to search for any cmdlets that have resourcelock in their name. So I'm going to pad the string resource lock with an asterisk on either end. So as long as it's got resource lock in the name, I want to see the cmdlet.

[Video description begins] He executes the following command: get-command *resourcelock*. The output displays the list of the commands with the word resourcelock in tabular format. It include four column and eight rows. The column headers are CommandType, Name, Version, and Source. The prompt does not change. [Video description ends]

And right away we can see for instance, New-AZResourceLock to create a new lock, or Get-AZResourceLock to retrieve a list of locks through Azure. We even have the option to remove or set a lock.

[Video description begins] He highlights the row entries under the Name column header in the output. [Video description ends]

And if I wanted more details on any one of these, I could run get-help, let's say a new-azresourcelock. I could ask for detail, and maybe pipe it to more to stop after the first screen full of output.

[Video description begins] He executes the following command: get-help new-azresourcelock -detail | more. The output displays the details and syntax of the command. The prompt does not change. [Video description ends]

Here I can see the syntax for this cmdlet, including the parameters, such as -LockId, -LockLevel and so on, even to the point where I'll see an example of how I can actually create a resource lock.

[Video description begins] He clears the screen and the prompt does not change. [Video description ends]

Let's get started by retrieving resource locks with get-azresourcelock. I'm going to press Enter.

[Video description begins] He executes the following command: get-azresourcelock. The output displays the details related to resource lock. The prompt does not change. [Video description ends]

So it looks like we already have a lock called Lock2 that has been applied to a resource group called Rg1. And the level we can see here has been set as ReadOnly. So what I want to do is remove that lock. In order to do that, I need to get this LockId.

[Video description begins] He highlights the LockId value in the output. [Video description ends]

So in order to do that through variables, I'm going to create a variable called $lock.

[Video description begins] He clears the screen and the prompt does not change. [Video description ends]

So the variable's $lock and it's going to equal the return value of running get-azresourcelock. I'll specify a lock name of lock2 and we know that that applies to a resource group called rg1. But I need the lockid property. Notice I've enclosed that expression within opening and closing parentheses. That's because .lockid will be a property of us retrieving that lock with that statement. Otherwise it'll think we're looking at lockid as being a property of rg1.

[Video description begins] He executes the following command: $lock=get-azresourcelock -lockname lock2 -resourcegroupname rg1.lockid. The output reads: Get-AzResourceLock: LockNotFound : The lock 'lock2' could not be found. The prompt does not change. [Video description ends]

Actually, let's see what that would look like in terms of an error if we didn't have those parenthesis there, what would it look like? Okay, well, we're getting some kind of a message about lock2 could not be found. So it's having a problem finding all of this. However, if I bring up the previous command where we did have our open and close parentheses, it didn't give us any complaints.

[Video description begins] He executes the following command: $lock=(get-azresourcelock -lockname lock2 -resourcegroupname rg1).lockid. No output displayed and the prompt does not change. [Video description ends]

And so if we just run $lock to see what's in the variable, looks like it's got the lockid because that's what we asked for, that's the property that's stored in the variable.

[Video description begins] He executes the following command: $lock. The output reads: /subscriptions/048b82ac-4519-403b-ab05-6b4305502109/resourceGroups/Rg1/providers/Microsoft.Authorization/locks/Lock2. The prompt does not change. [Video description ends]

Then given that we have that it's at this point that we are able to remove that resource locks. We have a lockid. We can do that with remove-azresourcelock -lockid, and we'll just pass it my variable now $lock. And actually if I don't tell them anything, it asks me for confirmation which I'll Ctrl C to that and then I'll clear the screen and bring up that command again, I'm just going to add -force to suppress it asking me and after a moment looks like it's done.

[Video description begins] He executes the following command: remove-azresourcelock -lockid $lock -force. The output reads: True. The prompt does not change. [Video description ends]

We can verify this with get -azresourcelock.

[Video description begins] He executes the following command: get-azresourcelock. No output displayed and the prompt does not change. [Video description ends]

Previously it showed us lock2 for rg1, the resource group but now it shows nothing because it's been successfully removed.

Resource Locking and Templates

[Video description begins] Topic title: Resource Locking and Templates. The presenter is Dan Lachance. [Video description ends]

Not only can you use the CLI PowerShell and the portal to manage resource tags in Azure, but you can also apply tagging from an ARM template. ARM standing for Azure Resource Manager. I've got an example here in WordPad, where essentially what we're looking at here is the type.

[Video description begins] A WordPad file called “Resource_Lock_Azure_ARM_Template.json” opens. It contains the following code, code starts: { “$schema”: "https://schema.management.azure.com/schemas/2015-01-01/deploymentTemplate.json#", “contentVersion”: “1.0.0.0”, “parameters”: {}, “variables”: {}, “resources”: [ { “type”: “Microsoft.Authorization/locks”, “apiVersion”: “2015-01-01”, “name”: “Rg3Lock”, “properties”: { “level”: “ReadOnly”, “notes”: “my notes” } } ], “outputs”: {} }. Code ends. [Video description ends]

This is Microsoft.Authorization/locks. I've got a name here. So I'm going to create a resource lock here, and I'm going to name it Rg3Lock. The level will be ReadOnly, and we can specify any additional notes.

[Video description begins] He highlights "my notes". [Video description ends]

What we don't see in here is the scope to which the resource lock will be applied. That happens at deployment time when the template is deployed.

[Video description begins] He opens the Microsoft Azure web portal. [Video description ends]

So let's go ahead and see that. Here in the portal, I'm going to click Create a resource because I want to create a template deployment from my template.

[Video description begins] A page called "New" opens. [Video description ends]

So I'm going to search for template, I'll choose Template deployment.

[Video description begins] A blade called "Template deployment (deploy using custom templates)" opens. [Video description ends]

 I'll choose Create, there are a bunch of ways that this could be done, I could have created this template deployment from the CLI or PowerShell.

[Video description begins] He clicks a button called "Create" and a blade called "Custom deployment" opens. [Video description ends]

I've decided I want to do it this way. So I can choose for example, Build your own template in the editor, now we already have it so I can just click Load file.

[Video description begins] He clicks a link called "Build your own template in the editor". A page called "Edit template" opens. [Video description ends]

So I've specified the template file that we looked at a moment ago in WordPad.

[Video description begins] A dialog box called "Open" opens. He selects the file. [Video description ends]

So it's going to create a lock called Rg3Lock. It's going to be ReadOnly. So I'm going to go ahead and Save that.

[Video description begins] He clicks a button called "Save". The Custom deployment blade opens. [Video description ends]

And it automatically pops up into the Custom deployment for that template where we can choose the Resource group where you want that applied.

[Video description begins] He clicks a drop-down list box called "Resource group" and selects an option called "Rg3". He selects a checkbox below a section called “TERMS AND CONDITIONS”. [Video description ends]

Let's say Rg3, and I'm going to have to go down and agree to the terms and conditions and I can click Purchase. So now the template deployment has begun. In other words, the lock to resource group Rg3 is in the midst of being applied. Now once it says it's done, which it just did, we're going to go to the resource group and take a look at the locks. So in the Resource group navigation bar, I'm going to click down on Locks and lo and behold there's our lock Rg3 and it's set as Read-only.


Resource Tagging Overview
In Azure, we know that a resource is something that can be deployed in the cloud, whether it's a SQL database or whether it's a virtual machine, a storage account, a network interface, and so on.

[Video description begins] Azure Resource Tagging. [Video description ends]

Well, we can tag resources and what that really means we're doing is we're adding metadata to them. Now why would you want to do that? You want to add tagging to resources because it allows you to add meaningful additional information to them. Such as related to a department, that that resource might have been deployed by, or a client, that resource should be billed to, or a project it should be billed to, or a cost center.

And you can organize or filter out resources and track them for billing purposes by tags. Wouldn't it be great if we could ask for anything related to project A, in terms of billing, so we can see the costs associated to that project. That's where resource tagging might be used. So it's metadata such as project with the value of XYZ or department, human resources or cost center, YHZ, or state testing as opposed to production. Now the thing about this is that a resource tag is a name and value pair. And you can use it as we know for searching, filtering, to group resources, and for billing purposes.

You can also use policies in Azure to enforce tagging. For example, you could set a policy so that any new resources deployed let's say in a particular resource group will automatically have a cost center tag applied with a specific value. That can be automated. Each resource can have up to a maximum of 50 tags. Now not every single type of Azure resource will support tags, but the vast majority of what you're going to want to do it to, they will support it. The other thing about this is that resource group tags are not inherited. So if you add a tag to a resource group, that does not mean it will automatically flow down and set that tag for all of the resources in the resource group. If you want to do that, look at working with Azure policies that have a modify effect for tagging purposes. You can use the CLI to work with resource tagging.

[Video description begins] Azure Resource Tagging - CLI. [Video description ends]

In our first example, we've got az tag list that's being piped to the line filtering grep tool in UNIX and Linux. And we're asking to display the tagName property.

[Video description begins] The following command is displayed: az tag list | grep "tagName". [Video description ends]

What that will do is give you a list of all of the tags in the entire Azure subscription. You can create a tag with az tag create, here we're naming it DeptID.

[Video description begins] The following command is displayed: az tag create --name DeptID. [Video description ends]

We can also add tag values with az tag add-value.

[Video description begins] The following command is displayed: az tag add-value --name DeptID --value 1234. [Video description ends]

So here we're adding it to DeptID, the value is 1234. You can even apply to a specific resource such as az network vnet update.

[Video description begins] The following command is displayed: az network vnet update -g rg1 -n vnet1 --set tags.DepID=4555. [Video description ends]

So we're applying a tag to a specific VNet in a resource group called rg1. And the name of that is vnet1. And we're using --set tags. and then Dept ID equals in this case the values of 4555. Resource tagging is also possible using PowerShell.

[Video description begins] Azure Resource Tagging - PowerShell. [Video description ends]

In our first example, we're creating a variable called $storaccount. And it's essentially going to point to a storage account. Now we get that by running get-azresource.

[Video description begins] The following command is displayed: $storacct=get-azresource -resourcename storacct3345 -resourcegroupname rg3. [Video description ends]

We specify the name of the resource, in this case, the storage account name and the resource group it's deployed into. So then our variable can be used to refer to that storage account. And in our second example, that's exactly what's being done. We're calling upon our variable. Then we're calling upon .tags and .add, because we want to add the CostCenter tag with the value of YHZ to the storage account.

[Video description begins] The following command is displayed: $storacct.tags.add("CostCenter","YHZ"). [Video description ends]

Then to commit that to the resource to the storage account, we run set-azresource. We use the -tag parameter.

[Video description begins] The following command is displayed: set-azresource -tag $storacct.tags -resourceid $storacct.resourceid -force. [Video description ends]

And in this case, we refer to the $storacct variable .tags property. And we use the -resourceid parameter and give the ID, the resource ID of our storage account variable to write to. And I'm using -force here just to suppress any messages that might pop-up asking you for sure here in PowerShell. The next thing I can do is retrieve resources.

[Video description begins] The following command is displayed: (Get-AzResource -Tag @{"CostCenter"="YHZ"} ).Name. [Video description ends]

Here, I'm using Get-AzResource with the -Tag parameter. And I refer to the tag within curly braces after the @ symbol. So in quotes, I've got CostCenter, it's the name of the tag, equals and then in quotes, I've got the value I'm looking for, YHZ. Now all of that is enclosed within open and close parentheses because if I don't do that, it's going to try to use .Name as a property of YHZ. That's not quite it. We need .Name to be a property of the return result of what executes first within the parentheses, in other words, retrieving the tags. We want to make sure we get the name of the resource. So what that command will really do is it's going to show us the names of all Azure resources in the subscription that have "CostCenter" = "YHZ". So it could potentially be a pretty long listing. In our last example, we can also remove tags.

[Video description begins] The following command is displayed: $storacct.tags.remove("CostCenter"). [Video description ends]

So in this case, we've already got our storage account pointing to in this case to storage account. Doesn't have to be a storage account, could be pretty much any type of resource that supports tagging. But we're calling upon the variable .tags.remove. And in parentheses and double quotes, I'm just giving it the name of the tag I want to remove, in this case CostCenter.


Resource Tagging and the Portal
Tagging resources in Azure is useful because tags are metadata. It's key and value pairs up to 50 that you could add for each individual Azure resource. You might want to tie a resource to a cost center, or a department, or a project, or something like that. Which facilitates searching, grouping, and even looking at things on a per billing basis for specific tags.

[Video description begins] The Microsoft Azure web portal opens. [Video description ends]

 So I'm going to go ahead here and get started in Azure by going to the All resources view where I'm going to open up an existing resource.

[Video description begins] He clicks an option called "All resources" and the corresponding page opens. [Video description ends]

It doesn't matter which one it is, let's say I scroll down and open up a virtual machine.

[Video description begins] He clicks a resource name called "WinSrv2019-1" and the corresponding blade opens. It is divided into two parts: navigation pane and content pane. [Video description ends]

When you click on an Azure resource, in the navigation panel, you'll see Tags. And when you click Tags, you'll see any existing tags or key and value pairs that have been assigned to that resource. And you can make changes to them up to having 50 key and value pairs.

[Video description begins] He clicks an option called “Tags” and its corresponding page opens in the content pane. [Video description ends]

Currently this virtual machine has two. Project : ABC is the first tag and CostCenter with the value of YHZ is the second one. And I can even add a third one here. So for example, I might tie it to a department. So I'm going to put it Department. Now if I've already created that, as I start typing it'll show up.

[Video description begins] He enters Department in a text box under a column name called "Name". [Video description ends]

However, nothing's popping up so this is a brand new tag I'm creating. And I'm going to set the Value to IT.

[Video description begins] He enters IT in a text box under a column name called "Value". [Video description ends]

So we've now got a third tag that we are adding here to this particular resource. Now we can go back and remove any one of these at any point in time. However, I'm going to click Save. So now that we've got those listed, we see the third one has been added at the bottom. If I were to go to another resource, let's close out of this virtual machine. Let's just pick a storage account and let's look at the tags for it.

[Video description begins] He clicks a resource name called "storacct333325" in the All resources page and the corresponding blade opens. [Video description ends]

And when I click on Tags, I'll see whatever it's been tagged with already.

[Video description begins] He clicks the Tags option and its corresponding page opens. [Video description ends]

And bear in mind, Azure administrators can apply policies that can add default tags. So there might be times when you're creating a resource and you don't add tags. And after you check it, after it's been created, there are tags. That's because of a policy. Anyway, here we can see this storage account has CostCenter : YHZ. If I were to type department, we'll notice it already knows it exists. And in the same way, it knows it's already got a value that's been typed in for another resource. And that's fine, we can go ahead and work with that.

[Video description begins] He enters Department under the Name column and IT under the Value column. [Video description ends]

When I click that, it's kind of like a little filter, Now, notice that we've also got a little square icon also over here, and it allows me to show resources with this tag. So let's do it for the first one here, CostCenter : YHZ.

[Video description begins] A page called "Resource with tag CostCenter : YHZ" opens. It includes a table with five columns and several rows. The column headers are Name, Type, Resource group, Location, and Subscription. [Video description ends]

it'll show me resources that have been tagged with that item. So specifically, we can see that all of these items are listed here. And let's just kind of move over a little bit so we can see them all. So they're all listed here as being items that are tagged with that same value. So we can see at the top here, Resources with tag CostCenter : YHZ. Now when you're creating a new resource, for example, let's just get out of here, we're not going to save that. I'm going to click Create a resource.

[Video description begins] He closes the Resource with tag CostCenter : YHZ page. The New page opens. [Video description ends]

Let's say we were going to create a brand new storage account. It could be anything but let's say that's what it was.

[Video description begins] He enters Storage account in the Search box and selects the corresponding option. A blade called "Storage account - blob, file, table, queue" opens. [Video description ends]

Now when you're in the midst of creating a new resource in Azure, during the creation, whether in the GUI or at the command line, you can specify tags.

[Video description begins] He clicks a button called "Create" and a blade called "Create storage account" opens. It includes tabs called "Basics", "Networking", "Advanced", "Tags", and "Review + create". [Video description ends]

We can see the Tags part of the wizard right here.

[Video description begins] He clicks the Tags tab. [Video description ends]

And when you go there, it's going to look familiar, you can put in the name and value, up to 50 of them. Okay, so we can do that as well. Let's go back to our All resources view.

[Video description begins] The All resources page opens. [Video description ends]

Because another aspect of working with tags in the GUI here in the portal, is that you can modify a selection of objects in terms of tagging. What that means is if I were to, let's say, put check marks by a couple of these resources, I can then click the Assign tags button up at the top of the view.

[Video description begins] A blade called "Assign tags" opens. [Video description ends]

Now within here, I'll see each of the selected items listed and I can delete tags and make changes. But I can also add one up here. So for example, if I wanted to, I could put in a tag, let's call it Stage. And for Value I'm going to put in Testing.

[Video description begins] He enters Stage under the Name column header and Testing under the Value column header. [Video description ends]

So it's the testing stage that I'm applying to this and I'm going to go ahead and click Save.

[Video description begins] The blade closes. [Video description ends]

So if I look at any one of these items, let's say this storage account, this second one here that was part of our initial selection.

[Video description begins] A blade called "cs210037ffe9de77ec8" opens. [Video description ends]

We can also see it says it assigned it to three resources. But let's just check this one anyway. If I go to Tags, I'll see whatever was already applied previous to my last action.

[Video description begins] He clicks the Tags options and its corresponding page opens. [Video description ends]

But I will also see that Stage was added with the value of Testing.

Resource Tagging and the CLI

[Video description begins] Topic title: Resource Tagging and the CLI. The presenter is Dan Lachance. [Video description ends]

The CLI can prove very handy when it comes to manipulating tags in an Azure environment. 

[Video description begins] The PowerShell command prompt window opens. The following prompt is displayed: PS /home/danlachance72>. [Video description ends]

To get started here, I'm going to type in az tag list. Now when I do that, it should show me details about all of the tags in this entire subscription, but there's too much metadata here.

[Video description begins] He executes the following command: az tag list. The output displays details of all tags. The prompt does not change. [Video description ends]

All I really want to see are the names of tags. So I'm going to clear the screen, I'm going to use the up arrow key to bring up that previous command.

[Video description begins] He executes the following command: cls. The screen gets cleared and the prompt does not change. [Video description ends]

And I'm going to use --query [ ] because it's an array or list of items. And for each of them, we want to see tagName, where Name has a capital N.

[Video description begins] He executes the following command: az tag list --query [].tagName. The output reads: [ "CostCenter", "ms-resource-usage", "Stage", "Project", "Department" ]. The prompt does not change. [Video description ends]

That's better. So now I can see the names of tags, not the values that have been applied in my entire subscription. I want to add a new one. So I'm going to run az tag create. And I want to create one, --name, called ClientID. We might want to do this if we want to track resources based on clients, for doing projects for clients, for billing purposes, for chargeback to clients.

[Video description begins] He executes the following command: az tag create --name ClientID. The output displays the details of the newly created tag. The prompt does not change. [Video description ends]

So what I've done is created the tag called ClientID.

[Video description begins] He executes the following command: clear. The screen gets cleared and the prompt does not change. [Video description ends]

And we can verify this, of course, if we bring up, using the up arrow key, our az tag list command where we're querying for tagName.

[Video description begins] He executes the following command: az tag list --query [].tagName. The output displays the lists of tags. The prompt does not change. [Video description ends]

There's ClientID shown at the bottom of the list, perfect. Now I want to add a value for the ClientID tag and then we can apply it to a resource. So to add a value, I'm going to run az tag add-value --name, well, the name of the tag is ClientID and --value. I'm going to set it to a value of 1234.

[Video description begins] He executes the following command: az tag add-value --name ClientID --value 1234. The output displays the details of the value added to the tag. The prompt does not change. [Video description ends]

Now I want to apply that to a resource. So to do that, I'm going to use, let's say, az network vnet update. I'm going to apply this to a VNet, a virtual network, that's deployed in a group, -g, called rg1, resource group 1. -n for the name of the VNet, is Vnet1, and --set tags. in this case ClientID. And of course, I could also specify the value here, 1234, that I want to add to that VNet.

[Video description begins] He executes the following command: az network vnet update -g rg1 -n Vnet1 --set tags.ClientID=1234. [Video description ends]

So by adding the value up above, what we're really simply doing is making it available to be assigned to individual resources.

[Video description begins] He opens the Microsoft Azure web portal. A blade called "Vnet1 | Tags" is open. [Video description ends]

And if we flip over here into the portal where I've pulled up the tags for Vnet1, we indeed will see that ClientID with a value of 1234 has been successfully added.


Resource Tagging and PowerShell
You can use PowerShell cmdlets to manage tags in an Azure environment.
So to get started, I want to make sure I get a handle on a specific storage account that I've already created. And I want to store that in a variable that I'm going to call storacct. So we can see here $storacct. And I'm going to tell it I want to run get-azresource-resourcename. Here's the name of the storage account I have. And it's in a resource group called rg1. Now I want to do this because I want to apply tags to that storage account.

[Video description begins] He executes the following command: $storacct=get-azresource -resourcename storacct333325 -resourcegroupname rg1. No output is displayed and the prompt does not change. [Video description ends]

So now let's just run $storacct to make sure we have a handle on that storage account. Looks good and currently we can see the tags for it CostCenter YHZ.

[Video description begins] He executes the following command: $storacct. The output displays the details of the variable storacct. The prompt does not change. [Video description ends]

Now what I want to do is add something new. So I'm going to go ahead in terms tags and run $storacct. We have that variable the points to the $storacct.tags.add. And in parenthesis and I will start double quotes. I want to set the Stage key with the value of Development and I'm going to go ahead and press Enter.

[Video description begins] He executes the following command: $storacct.tags.add("Stage", "Development"). No output is displayed and the prompt does not change. [Video description ends]

Now let's just clear the screen with cls and use the up arrow key to bring up our $storacct variable. Notice that Stage and Development the key and value pair have been added as a tag for that storage account. I can also do other stuff like this.

[Video description begins] He executes the following command: $storacct. The output displays the details of the variable storacct. The prompt does not change. [Video description ends]

So in parenthesis get-azresource -tag. And I'm going to specify here an @ symbol with an open curly brace, and in quotes I'm going to say Stage and = Development put all of the each of these items in quotes. And the next thing I'm going to do is close off my curly bracket and my parentheses and .Name. What does this mean? Well, it means that what I want to do is I want to show the names of any Azure resources that have that listed tag name and value. So "Stage"="Development". When I press enter, we still don't see anything here.

[Video description begins] He executes the following command: (get-azresource -tag @{"Stage"="Development"}).Name. No output is displayed and the prompt does not change. [Video description ends]

Well, that's strange because when we looked at our variable, it returned Stage Development. Well, that's the variable. It's not been committed to Azure yet. So what we need to do is run set-azresource to apply the change -tag, and then $storeacct.tags the tags property. Because we know that the tags property here contains what we just modified plus what was already there to begin with. So, $storeacct.tags -resourceid give it the resource ID that's going to be $storeacct.resourceid. Great working with variables isn't it makes things much easier. I'll just use -force to suppress any questions. And after that's done, it will have committed that change to that resource.

[Video description begins] He executes the following command: set-azresource -tag $storacct.tags -resourceid $storacct.resourceid -force. The output displays the details of the changes made. The prompt does not change. [Video description ends]

So I'm going to clear the screen we're going to use the up arrow key to get-azresource once again. And now we can see our storage account storacct333325.

[Video description begins] He executes the following command: (get-azresource -tag @{"Stage"="Development"}).Name. The output reads: storacct333325. The prompt does not change. [Video description ends]

Indeed is tagged with "Stage"="Development".                    


Azure Monitoring Overview
In order to keep your Azure environment secure and running optimally, you should perform monitoring.
Now in order to monitor something to determine if something is abnormal, you need to know what is normal. And that's where monitoring baselines kick in. Whether it's for determining what normal activity looks like at the network level, for the amount of network transmissions, for example. What is normal when it comes to activity on a host. Such as how much memory is usually used within normal workload conditions, or how busy the CPU is. And that also goes for an application, which could be spread out across multiple virtual machine hosts. Monitoring baselines will vary from one company to another, even from one department within an organization to another. Depending on how technology is being used. So an anomaly from the normal usage could indicate a security incident. It could just be a normal spike in activity. But if we gather enough activity over time, we'll know that that occurs.
So a security baseline then can be used to detect anomalies. And performance baselines can also be used simply to detect that things are busy or that they have slowed down. And in response we might resize virtual machine instances. Or configure autoscaling accordingly to accommodate the increase or decrease in those workloads. So baseline anomalies could show up as busy CPU utilization. Which could be indicative beyond of just a busy workload of cryptocurrency mining, if the machine has been infected, or ransomware. If we have excessive network traffic way beyond normal that could be indicative of a distributed denial of service or a DDoS network attack. Or we might have device operating system changes while the hardware is the same. Now that would mean that we might have a Windows host that is all of a sudden a Linux host, but everything else about it looks the same. So that could be indicative of someone having infected the machine or maybe booted it from a USB drive into a different OS, and so on. The other thing to think about is system and data access outside of regular work hours at irregular times. So there are a lot of different aspects of Azure resources that we might monitor to determine if there's an anomaly of some kind.
Now Azure monitoring gives us a number of options to track this stuff, including centrally. So we can monitor Azure resource activity logs. Now these activity logs are essentially audit logs of management tasks applied to Azure resources. Such as starting and stopping a VM or reconfiguring a VM or a web app. We can also look at the Azure Performance Diagnostics Windows VM extension. If you enable performance diagnostics, then you're getting more details on metrics like CPU utilization and traffic in and out, and disk I/O activity, for monitoring purposes. You can also pin a lot of these items to custom dashboards. So that you can pull up a dashboard and see what's of relevance for you when it comes to monitoring your Azure environment. You can also work with Azure Application Insights if you want to track activity and performance metrics for a specific web app. So that's really what that one is about.
Here on the screen we have a screenshot of monitoring some performance metrics for an individual VM or virtual machine. So we can see the CPU average utilization, the network traffic total, the disk bytes total, the disk operations per second on average. These are important metrics to monitor. However, we can also monitor things centrally instead of doing this and going to an individual Azure resource, in this case a VM.
And that's where Log Analytics workspaces kick in. This is centralized monitoring of Azure log data and also performance metric data. So configuration and log data feeds into Azure Monitor from the Log Analytics workspace. You can also run log queries in the Log Analytics workspace. Or from Azure Monitor, again, because Azure Monitor gets a lot of its data from Log Analytics workspaces. Your alert notifications can be configured in the Log Analytics workspace.
Now, there are a number of data sources that Log Analytics workspaces draw upon. Including storage account logs, Azure activity logs, physical and virtual servers. And you can even link it to your existing System Center Operations Manager or SCOM environment, if you have one. Now by adding servers to the Log Analytics workspace. It means that their performance metrics and log data can be collected centrally in the Log Analytics workspace.


Individual Resource Monitoring
There's a wealth of information available for each and every Azure resource whether you're interested in monitoring the performance of an item or auditing who did what to it from a management perspective or viewing things like operating system log details for VMs. 
All of this is available here in the portal. So I'm going to start in the portal by clicking to open up an existing virtual machine.

[Video description begins] He clicks a virtual machine called "WinSrv2019-1" and the corresponding blade opens. It is divided into two parts: navigation pane and content pane. [Video description ends]

And the first thing we're going to do is click on the Activity log on the left.

[Video description begins] He clicks an option called "Activity log" in the navigation pane and the corresponding page opens in the content pane. It includes a table with six columns and three rows. The column headers are Operation name, Status, Time, Time Stamp, Subscription, and Event initiated by. [Video description ends]

This is a log that really only relates to the management of this resource in Azure. And so on the right the default Timespan is the Last 6 hours. Let's get more stuff shown here by changing that, let's say, to the Last month and I'll click Apply.

[Video description begins] He clicks a drop-down list box called "Timespan" and selects an option called "Last month". He clicks a button called "Apply". [Video description ends]

Now we'll see that there are quite a few other operations related to the management of this VM. When we filter in that way we can see the name of the operation, whether it succeeded or not, the date and time stamp, the subscription it applies to and the user that initiated it. We can also further filter this. So for example, for Event severity, let's say the only thing I'm really interested in are Critical and Error messages, I'm not interested in seeing Warning or Informational.

[Video description begins] He clicks a drop-down list box called "Event severity". [Video description ends]

So I can unselect those or deselect them and now I've got a really small filtered list. And I can click on any one of these specific activity log entries to get more detail.

[Video description begins] He clicks an Operation name called "VirtualMachines" and the corresponding blade opens. [Video description ends]

Now, we also have other options for monitoring here.

[Video description begins] He closes the blade. [Video description ends]

I'm going to scroll way down in the navigation bar down to the Monitoring section where I'm going to click on Metrics. This is more related to the performance in this case of the VM.

[Video description begins] The corresponding page opens in the content pane. [Video description ends]

So we can select a metric from the drop-down list. For example, I'll just go down in this list and choose Percentage CPU.

[Video description begins] He clicks a drop-down list box called "Metric" and selects an option called "Percentage CPU". [Video description ends]

Now the Percentage CPU item is added here and we can see its value. We can see it's been plotted against the timeline on the bottom, and the percentage going across the top, from the bottom to the top.

[Video description begins] He points to a graph. [Video description ends]

We can also add metrics, you have more than one thing shown at the same time.

[Video description begins] He clicks a button called "Add metric". The options called "Scope", "Metric Namespace", "Metric", and "Aggregation" are displayed. [Video description ends]

So I'm going to go ahead and maybe and add Disk Read Bytes/second. And when you do that it will be plotted.

[Video description begins] He clicks a drop-down list box called "Metric" and selects an option called "Data Disk Read Bytes/Sec (Deprecated)". [Video description ends]

You'll see it might have a value. So we can see the values are being plotted but notice in the legend it's a different color. So this could be very important as well.

[Video description begins] He points to the graph. [Video description ends]

So we can monitor these metrics to track how this is doing. So performing well, do we maybe need to resize the VM, maybe scale it up so it can handle the workload better? That type of thing. We can also go to Logs over on the left.

[Video description begins] He clicks an option called “Logs” and its corresponding page opens in the content pane. [Video description ends]

Now it's not enabled by default, so I'm going to go ahead and click the Enable button. Now when you do that, you're going to have to select the subscription and a Log Analytics workspace that you want this associated with. So I'm okay with the default selection for the Log Analytics workspace. So I'm going to go ahead and click Enable.

[Video description begins] He clicks a button called "Enable" and a message box called "Submiting deployment" is displayed. [Video description ends]

Once that's enabled and you're still in the Logs blade, over on the right you'll see that things have changed.

[Video description begins] A tab called "New Query 1" is displayed. It is divided into two parts: navigation pane and content pane. [Video description ends]

You've got a query builder tab at the top here, it's called New Query 1. So this is a log query and down the left, you have a bunch of table names that you can select from.

[Video description begins] He points to the navigation pane. [Video description ends]

 Now if you expand any of these table names, what you will be exposing are the fields or columns within those tables.

[Video description begins] He expands a table name called "SecurityEvent". [Video description ends]

And you can see the data type is string or whatever it happens to be depending on the nature of what you're looking at. You can actually start selecting items.

[Video description begins] He expands a table name called "AzureActivity". [Video description ends]

So for example, if I double-click on one of these items, such as a column, I could see it puts it in here over on the right.

[Video description begins] He double-clicks a column name called "ActivityStatus (string)". The ActivityStatus column name is displayed in a text box called "Type your query here or click one of the example queries to start" in the content pane. A section called "Get started with sample queries" is also displayed in the content pane. It includes tabs called "History", "Performance and availability", and "3 more". [Video description ends]

But of course you can also select from some example query. So if I go to Performance and availability, I could start scrolling down and saying maybe I want to view Virtual Machine available memory and I could run that.

[Video description begins] He clicks a button called "Run" in a section called "Virtual Machine available memory". A code snippet is displayed. [Video description ends]

It puts in the query statement here, where for example, the name of the table which is case sensitive is Perf. And then I'm piping that to where and I'm asking for TimeGenerated over an hour ago and so on and you can run the query by clicking Run. If there are no results, then you're going to get a message that says there are no results. Otherwise, you'll see some of the details. So this is one thing that we can do here, work with log queries within an individual resource. Let's go up to Diagnostic settings here for this Windows virtual machine.

[Video description begins] He clicks an option called “Diagnostic settings” and its corresponding page opens in the content pane. [Video description ends]

So I've got a storage account selected here for storage.

[Video description begins] He points to a storage account called "storacct333325" in a drop-down list box called "Diagnostics storage account". [Video description ends]

And I'm going to choose Enable guest-level monitoring.

[Video description begins] He clicks a button called "Enable guest-level monitoring". The corresponding page opens in the content pane. It includes tabs called "Overview", "Performance counters", "Logs", "Crash dumps", "Sinks", and "Agent". [Video description ends]

The next thing I can do is determine under Overview, for example, which performance counters I'm interested in gathering. There are some default selections.

[Video description begins] He clicks a link called "Configure performance counters" and the Performance counters tab opens. He points to a table with two columns and six rows. The column headers are Performance counter and Sample rate (seconds). [Video description ends]

I can go to Logs and determine which operating system logs I'm interested in and some details.

[Video description begins] He clicks the Logs tab. [Video description ends]

So for example, I'm interested in the Application log with Critical, Error, Warning types of events, severities. And I could do the same type of thing for the Security and System logs. And I can even ask for additional items like IIS web server logs if there is one available there.

[Video description begins] He selects a checkbox called "IIS logs" and a value called "wad-iis-logfiles" is displayed in a text box called "Storage container name". [Video description ends]

And I can save all of these settings.

[Video description begins] He clicks a button called "Save". [Video description ends]

So when you enable the diagnostic settings, you're really saying I want to start to get more details of the inner workings of the workloads running in those, well, in this case in this VM.
Log Analytics Workspaces

[Video description begins] Topic title: Log Analytics Workspaces. The presenter is Dan Lachance. [Video description ends]

In Azure, a Log Analytics workspace is a resource that you can create and configure in the Azure environment.

[Video description begins] The Microsoft Azure web portal opens. A blade called "All resources" is open. It includes a table with four columns and several rows. The column headers are Name, Type, Resource group, Location, and Subscription. [Video description ends]

To get started here in the portal, I'm going to look at my All resources view. And I'm going to filter it for objects that are Log Analytics workspaces because I already have some here.

[Video description begins] He clicks a drop-down list box called "Type" and deselects an option called "Select all". He further selects an option called "Log Analytics workspace". [Video description ends]

So I'm going to filter for Log Analytics workspaces, click outside of it. Here I can see I've got a couple of them. Now why would you have more than one Log Analytics workspace? Here I've got some for different regions or locations, Canada Central I see under the Location heading and East US.

[Video description begins] He points to the table. [Video description ends]

Well that's one reason, you might want to have your centralized logging through the Log Analytics workspace per region. But you could have multiple Log Analytic workspaces within the same region. Maybe because you have different monitoring requirements for different resources within the same region. So to get started to add a new Log Analytics workspace, I'm going to click the Add button.

[Video description begins] A blade called "New" opens. [Video description ends]

And I'm going to search up log analytic, and there it is.

[Video description begins] He clicks an option called "Log Analytics" and the corresponding blade opens. [Video description ends]

Now I'm going to select Log Analytics and choose Create.

[Video description begins] He clicks a button called "Create" and a blade called "Log Analytics workspace" opens. [Video description ends]

First thing I have to do is create a name for it or specify a name. So I'm going to call it LogAnalytics-2.

[Video description begins] He enters LogAnalytics-2 in a text box called "Log Analytics Workspace". [Video description ends]

I'm going to deploy this into an existing resource group.

[Video description begins] He clicks a drop-down list box called "Resource group" and selects an option called "Rg1". [Video description ends]

Now, up above, it's kind of outlined my name in red, in a red outline, because that name is taken. And so I'm going to put in some characters to make that a unique name and I'll kind of click outside of it. And now the name is unique.

[Video description begins] He enters LogAnalytics-2yhz76 in the Log Analytics Workspace text box. [Video description ends]

So make sure you adhere to your naming standards within your organization when you change some of these names. I'm going to specify the location where I want this specific Log Analytics workspace. So I'm going to choose Canada Central.

[Video description begins] He clicks a drop-down list box called "Location" and selects an option called "Canada Central". [Video description ends]

I'm going leave it with my Pay-as-you-go subscription for the pricing tier and I'm going to choose OK.

[Video description begins] He clicks a button called "OK". The All resources blade opens. [Video description ends]

And now back here in the All resources view, I can see my newly created Log Analytics workspace.

[Video description begins] He points to LogAnalytics-2yhz76 in the table. [Video description ends]

So I'm going to go ahead and click on it to open it up. Because one of the first things that you really should contend with is which data sources are connected. To your newly created Log Analytics workspace.

[Video description begins] He clicks LogAnalytics-2yhz76 under the Name column header and the corresponding blade opens. It is divided into two parts: navigation pane and content pane. [Video description ends]

Because remember, this serves as a centralized performance metric and log data feed. Where's that coming from? Well, we can scroll down and go under Workspace Data Sources. Here we can click Virtual machines and we're going to see all of the virtual machines that we've got deployed.

[Video description begins] The corresponding page opens in the content pane. It includes a table with six columns and several rows. The column headers are Name, Log Analytics Connection, OS, Subscription, Resource group, and Location. [Video description ends]

But I can see here that they are connected to other workspaces.

[Video description begins] He points to the Log Analytics Connection column. [Video description ends]

So I could go in and click on a specific virtual machine and disconnect it from that workspace, and then connect it to this one.

[Video description begins] He clicks a resource name called "WinSrv2019-1" and the corresponding blade opens. [Video description ends]

Now, they may not already be connected to other Log Analytics workspaces if you don't have any already defined.

[Video description begins] He clicks a button called "Disconnect" and a dialog box called "Disconnect" opens. He clicks a button called "Yes" and the dialog box closes. [Video description ends]

That would be one thing that we would do.

[Video description begins] He switches back to the LogAnalytics-2yhz76 | virtual machines blade. [Video description ends]

The other thing is to look at Storage account logs and add storage account logs as well.

[Video description begins] He clicks an option called "Storage account logs" in the navigation pane and the corresponding page opens in the content pane. [Video description ends]

And if you go to Azure Activity log, you'll also be able to link a subscription or connect your subscription here into your Log Analytics workspace.

[Video description begins] He clicks an option called "Azure Activity log" in the navigation pane and the corresponding page opens in the content pane. It includes a table with two columns and one row. The column headers are Subscription and Log Analytics Connection. [Video description ends]

So that that type of activity, that would be the management of Azure resources, shows up centrally here in your Log Analytics workspace.

[Video description begins] He clicks a subscription called "Pay-As-You-Go" and the corresponding blade opens. He clicks a button called "Connect". [Video description ends]

Also, if you go in the navigation bar in your workspace to Workspace summary.

[Video description begins] He closes the blade and returns to the LogAnalytics-2yhz76 | Azure Activity log blade. [Video description ends]

Here you can add components such as Network Performance Monitor.

[Video description begins] He clicks an option called "Workspace summary" in the navigation pane and a blade called "Overview" opens. [Video description ends]

So if I were to click Add, I could search in the Azure Marketplace for Network Performance Monitor.

[Video description begins] He clicks a button called "Add" and a blade called "Marketplace" opens. It is divided into two parts: navigation pane and content pane. [Video description ends]

And I would add this one, this is from Microsoft.

[Video description begins] He selects an option called "Network Performance Monitor" and the corresponding page opens in the content pane. [Video description ends]

 If I wanted to be able to monitor connectivity, let's say between virtual machine endpoints or different subnets in my environment.


Log Analytics Workspace Data Sources
A Log Analytics workspace in Azure is created automatically.

[Video description begins] The Microsoft Azure web portal opens. The home page is open. It includes a table with three columns and several rows. The column headers are Name, Type, and Last Viewed. [Video description ends]

It is automatically created for the region in which you deploy resources. So notice here in my example, I have two default workspaces, one for the Canada Central region because I've deployed resources there. And also another for Eastern US because I've also deployed resources there.

[Video description begins] He points to the Name column in the table. [Video description ends]

So you can build your own manual Log Analytics workspace or work with the ones that are created automatically. You can think of it as a centralized way as the name implies to analyze logged information. So instead of going to view the log details for each and every Azure resource, instead you can have it collected in one location. So, for example, let's open up one of these default Log Analytics workspaces.

[Video description begins] He clicks a row entry and the corresponding blade open. It is divided into two parts: navigation pane and content pane. [Video description ends]

What's important is determining the data sources attached to the workspace. So, you can see that when you open up the workspace, if you scroll down in the navigation bar on the left. And you go to the Workspace Data Sources section. You can see that we can click on Virtual machines to pull up that blade.

[Video description begins] He clicks an option called "Virtual machines" in the navigation pane and the corresponding page opens in the content pane. It includes a table with six columns and several rows. The column headers are Name, Log Analytics Connection, OS, Subscription, Resource group, and Location. [Video description ends]

This will give me a list of all of my VMs and I'll see which ones are attached to this workspace. As opposed to other workspaces or just not connected to any workspace at all.

[Video description begins] He points to the Log Analytics Connection column. [Video description ends]

So we have a number of them here that are connected. Now you can select and click on an individual, in this case, virtual machine, and either disconnect or connect it at any point in time.

[Video description begins] He clicks a row entry called "AppServer2" under the Name column header and the corresponding blade opens. [Video description ends]

Now Connect is unavailable because this VM AppServer2 is already connected to this Log Analytics workspace. 

[Video description begins] He closes the blade. [Video description ends]

But let's say we went to this other virtual machine which is showing us Not connected to any workspace, well, then I have the option to click Connect.

[Video description begins] He clicks a row entry called "WinSrv2019-2" under the Name column header and the corresponding blade opens. [Video description ends]

So we've got a number of options available from that perspective.

[Video description begins] He closes the blade. [Video description ends]

 And by connecting the virtual machine here, you are allowing yourself to have a centralized place here in the Log Analytics workspace. To view all of the log information for all of these attached items.

[Video description begins] He points to the Name column. [Video description ends]

Now those are just Virtual machines. Other data sources include Storage accounts logs.

[Video description begins] He clicks an option called "Storage accounts logs" in the navigation pane and the corresponding page opens in the content pane. [Video description ends]

So in the same way you can go there and you can click Add if there are none there already added.

[Video description begins] He clicks a button called "Add" and a blade called "Add storage account log" opens. [Video description ends]

And you can specify storage accounts that you want to add to this centralized Log Analytics workspace.

[Video description begins] He clicks an option called "Storage account Please select a storage account" and a blade called "Choose storage account" opens. [Video description ends]

So if I were to select a Storage account, I can then specify the Data Type.

[Video description begins] He selects a storage account called "storacct333325" and the Choose storage account blade closes. [Video description ends]

So what type of stuff is stored in that storage account in terms of logging that you want it connected here.

[Video description begins] He clicks an option called "Data Type Please select a data type" and a blade called "Data Type" opens. [Video description ends]

So maybe, for example, I know I've got some IIS logs stored there.

[Video description begins] He selects an option called "IIS logs" and the Data Type blade closes. [Video description ends]

So I could go ahead and select that and add it here.

[Video description begins] He clicks a button called "OK" and the Add storage account log blade closes. [Video description ends]

You can also take a look at Azure activity logs.

[Video description begins] He clicks an option called "Azure Activity log" in the navigation pane and the corresponding page opens in the content pane. It includes a table with two columns and one row. The column headers are Subscription and Log Analytics Connection. [Video description ends]

Now activity logs are essentially kind of like audit logs that give you information about the management of Azure resources themselves. As opposed to what's happening within them, such as for a virtual machine. And so you can link or connect your subscriptions. 

[Video description begins] He clicks a row entry called "Pay-As-You-Go" under the Subscription column header and the corresponding blade opens. [Video description ends]

So if I go to my subscription, I could choose Connect to connect that here to have that information here as well.

[Video description begins] He closes the blade. [Video description ends]

 So you have a number of different data sources then so that you can centrally collect logged information from your Azure environment.
Log Queries

[Video description begins] Topic title: Log Queries. The presenter is Dan Lachance. [Video description ends]

In Azure, it's important to have the skills to properly create log queries and also to be able to interpret the results for the general overall well being and improved performance, perhaps, of your workloads running in Azure. Now you can work with log queries for an individual resource.

[Video description begins] The Microsoft Azure web portal opens. [Video description ends]

For example, I can open up an individual virtual machine and in the navigation bar on the left, if I scroll all the way down, under Monitoring, I can then go to Logs.

[Video description begins] He clicks a Virtual machine called "WinSrv2019-1" and the corresponding blade opens. It is divided into two parts: navigation pane and content pane. [Video description ends]

Now from here I can start to conduct log queries.

[Video description begins] He clicks an option called "Logs" in the navigation pane and the corresponding page opens in the content pane. It includes a tab called "New Query1". It is divided into two parts: navigation pane and content pane. [Video description ends]

So I can start typing in things where I can refer over on the left here to table names. There's a table, for example, called Event, and if I expand that I can see the fields within it, I can start referring to them.

[Video description begins] He expands a table name called "Event" in the navigation pane. [Video description ends]

So for example, if I want to see everything in the Event table, I can simply say Event and I can continue on and tell it I want to count, or sort, and so on.

[Video description begins] He enters Event in a text box called "Type your query here or click one of the example queries to start". [Video description ends]

But if all I want to do is just take a look at that table, then I could just run that query.

[Video description begins] He clicks a button called "Run" and the result is displayed in the content pane. [Video description ends]

And if there are results, I would see them here. And you also have the option of using a number of Example queries.

[Video description begins] He clicks an option called "Example queries". A new tab called "New Query 2" opens. In the content pane tabs called "History" and "Performance and availability" are displayed. [Video description ends]

If I click that up at the top, so for example, maybe I'll look at Performance and availability and I could scroll through and there are numerous items here.

[Video description begins] He selects the Performance and availabilty tab. [Video description ends]

So such as Virtual Machine free disk space, when I click Run, it puts those query statements in here up above.

[Video description begins] He clicks a button called "Run" in a section called "Virtual Machine free disk space". [Video description ends]

And I can go ahead and run the query. Of course, I can select the Time range.

[Video description begins] He clicks a button called "Run". [Video description ends]

It doesn't have to be the Last 24 hours, maybe the Last 7 days, and that type of thing.

[Video description begins] He clicks a drop-down list box called "Time range" and selects an option called "Last 7 days" and clicks a button called "Run". [Video description ends]

So when you're working with these types of queries, that's what you can do.

[Video description begins] He selects the New Query 1 tab. [Video description ends]

Now, you can also do this from the perspective if I go Home here of a Log Analytics workspace in Azure.

[Video description begins] He clicks a link called "Home" and the Microsoft Azure home page opens. [Video description ends]

So if I open up a specific Log Analytics workspace, then I can go to Logs, and I can pretty much do the same type of thing.

[Video description begins] He clicks a Log Analytics workspace and a corresponding blade opens. It is divided into two parts: navigation pane and content pane. [Video description ends]

Now, when you first enable logging in your Azure environment, it might take time before it starts to populate this and you can start to use it.

[Video description begins] He clicks an option called "Logs" and the corresponding page opens in the content pane. It includes a tab called "New Query 1". [Video description ends]

And that's why up here I've got another browser window open, where to learn how to work with log queries, this is very useful. You've got a Demo environment made available by Microsoft.

[Video description begins] He opens a new tab and a page called "Get started with log queries in Azure Monitor" is open. [Video description ends]

Now when you select it, you can sign in using your normal Azure credentials, and then start to work with log queries.

[Video description begins] A web page called "Logs - Microsoft Azure" opens. It includes a tab called "New Query 1". It is divided into two parts: navigation pane and content pane. [Video description ends]

So we could see on the left, we're in the Demo environment where we can see a number of interesting categories. 

[Video description begins] He expands an option called "Security" in the navigation pane. [Video description ends]

For example, if I go under Security, then I'll start to see a number of table names. These are table names. So for example, there's SecurityAlert. If I expand that, I then see the fields or columns if you wish within the SecurityAlert table.

[Video description begins] He expands a table name called "SecurityAlert". [Video description ends]

So interesting. So if I start typing in, watch it, let's put in securityalert, but I'm going to put it in all lowercase letters.

[Video description begins] In the content pane, he enters securityalert in the Type your query here or click one of the example queries to start text box. He clicks the Run button. [Video description ends]

If I try to run this query, I'm going to get a SYNTAX ERROR. And that's because the table names are case sensitive. So if I were to put in SecurityAlert in proper or initial caps and then run it, now we have some results showing up down there. Now when you're constructing these log queries, you can start to type things in, I'm going to put in a space. I'm going to type in a vertical pipe, which is a pipe symbol. I want to take the result of what's on the left and feed it into something on the right such as counting the number of occurrences or ordering them or summarizing them or doing something of that nature. So let's say, for example, that we want to run a search. So I'm going to type in the word search in and then I'm going to specify the name of the table. And we know that the name of the table is going to be case sensitive. So SecurityAlert. It would tell it I'm looking for ssh. And I could even, if I really wanted to, I could pipe it and tell it I want to only take, let's say, 5 entries.

[Video description begins] He enters search in (SecurityAlert) "ssh" | take 5 in the Type your query here or click one of the example queries to start text box. He clicks the Run button. [Video description ends]

And then, of course, what I'm going to do is click Run to run that query. We can see the result of the query is now showing down below. We've got some security alerts for Failed SSH brute force attacks. In your environment, you'll be able to click the Save button to save the query so you can run it in the future. Now, this is not a complicated query that we've got here. It's a one liner, but sometimes it can get quite complex and you're going to want to reuse them as opposed to recreating them every time. You'll find them by going into the Query explorer under Saved Queries.

[Video description begins] He clicks an option called "Query explorer" and the corresponding blade opens. [Video description ends]

You can also go into Azure Monitor. So Azure Monitor up at the top, I'll just click Monitor.

[Video description begins] A blade called "Monitor | Overview" opens. It is divided into two parts: navigation pane and content pane. [Video description ends]

Monitor is simply a way to bring together a lot of your different log information throughout your entire subscription, for example. So let's say here in Monitor, I were to click on Logs over on the left.

[Video description begins] He clicks an option called "Logs". A blade called "Select a scope" opens. It includes a table with three columns and several rows. The column headers are Scope, Resource type, and Location. [Video description ends]

Or from here I can select a scope. So let's say, I select my Pay-As-You-Go subscription and I click Apply.

[Video description begins] He clicks a button called "Apply" and the blade closes. A blade called "Monitor | Logs" opens. It includes the New Query 1 tab. [Video description ends]

And so now we're in the very familiar interface where we can begin running our queries. We can also navigate different types of tables. And of course we can see the columns so we can start building our queries and working with the results and saving them and getting to them from the Query explorer.
Dashboard Queries

[Video description begins] Topic title: Dashboard Queries. The presenter is Dan Lachance. [Video description ends]

You can run Azure log queries from within specific resources or from a Log Analytics workspace, or even from Azure Monitor.

[Video description begins] The Microsoft Azure web portal opens. [Video description ends]

So I'm going to go into Monitor by searching for that in the portal here in the top search bar and I'll choose Monitor.

[Video description begins] He clicks an option called "Monitor" and a blade called "Monitor | Overview" opens. It is divided into two parts: navigation pane and content pane. [Video description ends]

Azure Monitor brings everything together in one location. So that you can query Logs for items, for example, in the scope of your entire subscription, or it could be a resource group.

[Video description begins] He clicks an option called "Logs" and the corresponding page opens in the content pane. The New Query 1 tab is open in the content pane. [Video description ends]

But at any rate here, I've got a default workspace Log Analytics workspace object selected here.

[Video description begins] He clicks a link called "Select Scope" and the Select a scope blade opens. [Video description ends]

I could choose Select Scope and change that up if I so chose, but I'm going to leave it as it is because what I want to do is just run a basic query here.

[Video description begins] He closes the blade. [Video description ends]

I'm going to look in the Heartbeat table and let's say we run it.

[Video description begins] He enters Heartbeat in the Type your query here or click one of the example queries to start text box. He clicks the Run button. [Video description ends]

Well, there are no results found for the Last 24 hours, but how about we go back 7 days and run that again?

[Video description begins] He clicks the Time range drop-down list box and selects the Last 7 days option. He clicks the Run button. [Video description ends]

Think of a Heartbeat as being a "I am alive" type of message sent by computers in Azure. And we can see down below, we do have some activity related to that, including showing the ComputerIP addresses. Now, we know that we can save log queries, I could click the little Save button here.

[Video description begins] A blade called "Save" opens. [Video description ends]

And I can give this a name and save it as either a Query or a Function.

[Video description begins] He clicks a drop-down list box called "Save as". [Video description ends]

If you save it as a Function, then you could call that from another query using the short name of the function. But at any rate, and then you can specify a Category. Now, that's fine, but we can also pin this to a dashboard.

[Video description begins] He closes the Save blade. [Video description ends]

So I'm going to go ahead and click the Pin to dashboard button here.

[Video description begins] A blade called "Pin to another dashboard" opens. It includes tabs called "Select existing" and "Create new". [Video description ends]

We could choose an existing one or create a new one, I'm going to create a new one.

[Video description begins] He clicks the Create new tab. [Video description ends]

And I'm going to call it Dashboard1.

[Video description begins] He enters Dashboard1 in a text box called "Dashboard name". [Video description ends]

It's going to be for my Pay-As-You-Go subscription and I can specify the Location, let's say Canada Central for this.

[Video description begins] He clicks a drop-down list box called "Location" and selects an option called "Canada Central". [Video description ends]

And then I'm going to choose Apply.

[Video description begins] He clicks a button called "Apply" and the blade closes. The home page of the Microsoft Azure opens. [Video description ends]

Now, here in the portal, you can search for dashboard at any time up in the bar and I'm going to choose Shared dashboards.

[Video description begins] A blade called "Shared dashboard" opens. It includes a table with four columns and one row. The column headers are Name, Go to dashboard, Location, and Subscription. [Video description ends]

And I can see Dashboard1 listed here, so I'm going to click to open that up.

[Video description begins] He clicks a row entry called "Dashboard1" and the corresponding blade opens. [Video description ends]

However, it says No data for the given query. And if I try to refresh the update, still no joy. Now, that's because it's the Past 24 hours by default, so there's no data to show for that. So let's choose the Past 7 days, I'll click Apply.

[Video description begins] He clicks a drop-down list box called "UTC Time" and selects an option called "Past 7 days". [Video description ends]

And after a moment we should see that we have our result for Heartbeat messages sent from computers. Now at this point, it says This dashboard has unpublished changes. We just changed the time range filter. So I'm going to go ahead and choose Publish changes.

Video description begins] He clicks a button called "Publish changes". [Video description ends]

So this way, we can put the types of resultant log query information that's relevant to us at the time on a dashboard for quick access.
    
                    
Performance Metrics
Using performance metrics and monitoring them in Azure helps you optimize the performance of resources. For things like virtual machines or for web applications. If you're using, for example, Application Insights to track the performance of a web app.

[Video description begins] The Microsoft Azure web portal opens. [Video description ends]

Let's open up an existing virtual machine here in the portal to view its individual performance metrics. 

[Video description begins] He clicks a virtual machine called "WinSrv2019-1" and the corresponding blade opens. It is divided into two parts: navigation pane and content pane. [Video description ends]

Now we can do that by scrolling down in the navigation bar or the properties for that VM. All the way down under the Monitoring section where we can click on Metrics.

[Video description begins] The corresponding page opens in the content pane. [Video description ends]

Now over here on the right, we can select a metric from the drop-down list. So for example, I'm going to go down, let's say into the P's and choose Percentage CPU. And we can see that the CPU performance metric has been mapped on a chart.

[Video description begins] He clicks a drop-down list box called "Metric" and selects an option called "Percentage CPU". [Video description ends]

We can see the percentages going up on the left. And it's plotted against a timeline going across the bottom from left to right.

[Video description begins] He points to the graph. [Video description ends]

But you can also click the Add metric button to add more than one metric on a single graph. So for example, maybe I'm interested in some other metric like Disk Write Bytes if I'm interested in disk performance.

[Video description begins] He clicks the Metric drop-down list box and selects an option called "Disk Write Bytes". [Video description ends]

So now I've got both items plotted. And I can see by the legend that in this particular case, the Disk Write Bytes is shown in red. So I can track that performance metric separately from my Percentage CPU. If I hover over any of those metrics, it allows me to zoom in on that specific metric. Because it's highlighted and everything else is dimmed on the graph. We can also pin this to a dashboard so that we have an easy convenient way to look at this. Instead of coming in each time we're interested in this and setting it up from scratch. 

[Video description begins] He clicks an option called "Overview" in the navigation pane and the corresponding page opens in the content pane. [Video description ends]

Now if I go back to the Overview blade for this VM over on the right, if I scroll down. 

[Video description begins] The content pane includes graphs called "CPU (average)", "Network (total)", "Disk bytes (total)", and "Disk operations/sec (average)". [Video description ends]

I can also see some standard performance metrics, which by default shows me activity for the last hour. But I could choose, let's say last 7 days.

[Video description begins] He selects an option called "7 days". [Video description ends]

Where I can see the CPU usage average, the network traffic total, I can see the disk bytes total, disk operations per second. So we've got a lot of these items that are here automatically by default. But let me search here in the search bar in the portal for monitor.

[Video description begins] He clicks the Monitor option and the Monitor blade opens. It is divided into two parts: navigation pane and content pane. [Video description ends]

Azure Monitor is a centralized tool that allows you to also view performance metrics from here, instead of from an individual resource.

[Video description begins] He selects an option called "Metrics" in the navigation pane and the corresponding page opens in the content pane. [Video description ends]

Now from here I have to select a scope.

[Video description begins] He opens the Select a scope blade. it includes tabs called "Browse" and "Recent". The Browse tab is selected. It includes a table with three columns and several rows. The column headers are Scope, Resource type, and Location. [Video description ends]

So this is different because we're not already in a resource like a VM, so it doesn't know what to show us. We have to select a scope. So I can drill down within a subscription and then ultimately within a resource group.

[Video description begins] He points to a subscription called "Pay-As-You-Go" under the Scope column header. [Video description ends]

And I could even select, for example, a Log Analytics workspace.

[Video description begins] He expands a resource group called "defaultresourcegroup-cca". [Video description ends]

So what we could do here is we have the ability because notice that we can expand and collapse our subscriptions. This is a way for you to be able to monitor performance metrics across different subscriptions by adding different scopes. So I'm going to add a Log Analytics workspace here and I'll click Apply.

[Video description begins] He clicks a button called "Apply" and the Select a scope blade closes. [Video description ends]

Now what you have to think about is the data sources attached to that Log Analytics workspace. So the specific virtual machines or storage account logs. Because from there you'll be able to then determine which specific metrics you might be interested in. 

[Video description begins] He clicks a drop-down list box called "Metric" and selects an option called "Disk Writes/sec". [Video description ends]

So for example, if I were to choose, let's say Disk Writes/sec, then I will have some information plotted that is available based on all of the information that's made available to that Log Analytics workspace.


Action Groups and Alert Rules
Instead of going to each and every resource in Azure to monitor the performance, you can configure instead alerts. Alerts can send you notifications through your configuration of what are called action groups. And this way, you are notified when there are issues based on your configured thresholds, instead of you having to go through and peruse all of your Azure resources, which is much more time consuming.

[Video description begins] The Microsoft Azure web portal opens. [Video description ends]

So let's get started with this. First thing I want to do here is open up an existing Log Analytics workspace.

[Video description begins] He clicks a Log Analytics workspace called "LogAnalytics-2yhz76" and the corresponding blade opens. It is divided into two parts: navigation pane and content pane. [Video description ends]

The reason I'm doing this is because a Log Analytics workspace is a centralized logging hub. Where if I scroll down in the navigation bar, we have a number of different types of data sources that can feed their performance metric and log data into this Log Analytics workspace. And so as a result, we can configure some alerting here within the Log Analytics workspace. So if I scroll down under the Monitoring section in the left-hand navigator, there's Alerts.

[Video description begins] He clicks an option called "Alerts" in the navigation pane and the corresponding page opens in the content pane. [Video description ends]

Now these are alerts that will be specific to this Log Analytics workspace. So before I create an alert rule, I'm going to first click on Manage actions.

[Video description begins] He clicks a button called "Manage actions" and the corresponding blade opens. It includes a table with five columns and one row. The column headers are Action group name, Short name, Resource group, Status, and Actions. [Video description ends]

When I do that, I can create a new action group, I can add an action group. There might be some that are here already based on what you might have configured previously, but I'm going to add a new action group.

[Video description begins] He clicks a button called "Add action group" and a blade called "Add action group" opens. [Video description ends]

And this action group is going to be used for notification for administrators. I'm going to call it AdminNotify.

[Video description begins] He enters AdminNotify in a text box called "Action group name". [Video description ends]

The short name will be the same because the Short name field is required. The next thing down below is I'm going to add an action type, you can add multiple action types to this action group. We can see here we can trigger an Automation Runbook or an Azure Function, or we can have an e-mail message sent or in my case I want an SMS text message sent. 

[Video description begins] He clicks a drop-down list box called "Action Type" and selects an option called "Email/SMS/Push/Voice". A blade called "Email/SMS/Push/Voice" opens. [Video description ends]

So I'm going to select that item, that's going to open up a new blade where I'm going to turn on the check mark for SMS and I'm going to specify a phone number.

[Video description begins] The Email/SMS/Push/Voice blade closes. [Video description ends]

Now the next thing I need to do is supply a name, so I'm going to call it TextITDirector.

[Video description begins] He enters TextITDirector in a text box called "Action name". [Video description ends]

And then I'm going to click OK. So I've got my action group configuration created and it now shows up in the list, it says AdminNotify.

[Video description begins] He clicks a button called "OK" and the Add action group blade closes. [Video description ends]

Let's go back into the Alerts for our Log Analytics workspace. And in the Alerts blade or view, I'm going to click New alert rule.

[Video description begins] He clicks a button called "New alert rule" and a blade called "Create rule" opens. [Video description ends]

I want to create an alert to be notified when something happens. In this case, specifically be notified through an SMS text message based on the phone number we've configured. So the resource here in the alert rule is already specified. It's a specific Log Analytics workspace. It could be based on something else. I mean we could have done this, we could have configured an alert for a specific virtual machine for example. But in this case, the resource is the Log Analytics workspace. Now we have to add a condition. So under CONDITION, I will click Add.

[Video description begins] He clicks a button called "Add" and a blade called "Configure signal logic" opens. It includes a table with three columns and several rows. The column headers are Signal name, Signal type, and Monitor service. [Video description ends]

So for the Monitor service in the upper right in that drop-down list, I'm going to choose Platform. I'm going to see platform-specific items and I'm going to filter the list for processor and there we go, % Processor Time.

[Video description begins] He clicks a drop-down list box called "Monitor service" and selects an option called "Platform". [Video description ends]

So I'm going to select that item to configure a condition.

[Video description begins] He clicks a row entry % Processor Time under the Signal name column header. [Video description ends]

I want to look for busy or overburdened processor utilization. Then I'm going to scroll down and I can select a specific dimension if I want to filter or zoom into a specific Computer or an ObjectName and so on.

[Video description begins] He enters 80 in a text box called "Threshold value". [Video description ends]

But I don't, I just want it overall. So what I want to do is essentially I want to be notified when we've got an 80% Greater than, 80% on Average of CPU utilization. Now we can see the frequency of evaluating this type of condition which is going to be every minute. And we can see the Aggregation granularity (Period) is set to 5 minutes. So I'm going to go ahead and click Done.

[Video description begins] He clicks a button called "Done" and the Configure signal logic blade closes. [Video description ends]

So we've now got our condition whenever the CPU processor utilization is above a certain amount. Then we have to go down and apply this to an action group. We don't have an action group selected, but we just created one recently. So I'm going to go ahead and click on Add.

[Video description begins] He clicks a button called "Add" and a blade called "Select an action group to attach to this alert rule" opens. It includes a table with two columns and two rows. The column headers are Action group name and Contain actions. [Video description ends]

There's the AdminNotify action group where we've got 1 SMS text message that will be sent, and I'm going to go ahead and choose Select.

[Video description begins] He selects a checkbox for a row entry called "AdminNotify" under the Action group column header and clicks a button called "Select". The blade closes. [Video description ends]

Then all the way down at the bottom, I have to give this a name. So I'm going to call this alert rule BusyCPU, and I'm going to scroll down further and just click outside of that, and then I can click Create alert rule.
Now if we have any issues related to that alert rule, they will show up here in the Alerts blade or the Alerts view.
Now we can also use our action groups and configure alerts for an individual resource as we've alluded to.
So let's say I opened up an individual virtual machine here in the portal.
What I could do is scroll down in its navigation bar on the left, and go down under Monitoring and there's Alerts.
When I go into Alerts, it's the same type of interface that we just saw.
For example if I click Manage alert rules, I will see any alert rules created for this specific resource of which there are none. Now I could click New alert rule, and I could go through and configure the same type of thing we did.
The difference being that the resource is a specific VM as opposed to a Log Analytics workspace. So I could go through the same types of motions and add a condition for it. 
And when it comes to the action groups, if I were to click Add, then I would see my global list of action groups including AdminNotify.


Application Insights
One common use of Microsoft Azure is the deployment of customized web applications. And so developers will always be interested in monitoring how the app is being used and how it's performing. And we can do that by enabling Application Insights.
So here in the portal, to do that, I'm going to create a new web application.
And during the creation I'm going to make sure I enable Application Insights, you can also turn it on after the fact.
So when I go to create a web app, there are some common things I need to fill in.
Including the resource group it will be deployed into, a name for it.
So I'm just going to put in a unique name here, custom name.
And I'm going to use a code-based application, I'll just choose here, let's say ASP.NET.
I'm going to deploy this in Canada Central as a region.
And it's going to create a new application service plan, App Service Plan. That's fine, it determines the underlying horsepower and the pricing tier, I'm going to accept the default for the sizing. I'm going to click Next on monitoring, so Next: Monitoring.
This is where we want to make sure that Application Insights is enabled. And it is, it's set to Yes. And it's going to create a new Application Insights resource. And here, it's pretty much got the name of my web application. That's fine, perfect. 
So I'm going to go ahead and choose Next, and continue all the way through accepting defaults by clicking the Next button.
Finally, I'll click the Create button to create this web app where App Insights is actually enabled now.
We can now see our deployment is complete, I'm going to click Go to resource to go into the web application.
Where in the left-hand navigation bar, if I scroll down under the Settings section, I'll see Application Insights. I'm going to click to open up that blade.
We're over on the right, I can see it's enabled, this is where you can enable or disable it. And I can see that it's connected to my Application Insights resource. So there's a separate resource that's created and there's a link to it here, which I will click on.
In the Overview blade of the App Insights object, so that's what we're looking at now, over on the right. I can see some performance metrics such as Failed requests for the app, Server response time, Server requests, and overall Availability. 
If I click Live Metrics over on the left, after a moment I'll get some new live metrics related to my application. So Incoming Requests, Request Duration, failure rates, and so on. So for developers, this is going to be absolutely crucial so that they might know what to tweak within the application to optimize performance.


Network Performance Monitor
In Azure, the Network Performance Monitor tool allows you to monitor and identify network problems. Whether they're related to firewall issues or maybe they're related to routing configuration errors.
Either way, here in a Log Analytics workspace, when you want to work with the Network Performance Monitor, you have to add it here. Here's what that means. If I scroll down in the left-hand navigation bar for this Log Analytics workspace, I can then click on Workspace summary over on the left.
Now you're not going to see the Network Performance Monitor listed here by default. It's showing up here because I've already added it.  
What you would normally do is click the Add button up at the top and you would search for Network Performance Monitor.
And you could add it by selecting it from the marketplace, here it is. Network Performance Monitor from Microsoft, but I've already got that done. So I'm going to go back here to the Overview where the Network Performance Monitor panel is listed here.
So, when you first go into that, you're going to be configuring it. So I'm going to go ahead and click on the Configure link up at the top.
And then on the left I'm going to click SETUP.
This is what you're going to see the first time you come in. It wants you to install the OMS agents, the monitoring agents within your hosts. Now if you added virtual machines to this Log Analytics workspace. They automatically already have the Microsoft monitoring agent extension installed. So it's already done. You can also tweak and configure performance monitoring.
You can also tweak and configure service connectivity monitoring such as for Office 365, Microsoft Dynamics.
You can also monitor ExpressRoute dedicated circuit connections.
So over on the left, I'm going to click NETWORKS.
I've already added a couple of networks here. I've got my default network and I can see the subnetwork range for that VNet is 10.0.1.0. But I've also already added VNet9 here. You can click the Add network button and just fill in the details for the network name. And you'll be able to select an unallocated subnet that it's detected down below here. So I've done that and I've called it VNet9. 
IThen if I click on SUBNETWORKS over on the left, 'll see the subnets that stem from those virtual networks.  
And if I click on NODES, I can see here I've got three virtual machines in Azure. They're up and running. The AGENT STATUS shows as being Healthy. Now these three virtual machines in my case are added to this Log Analytics workspace. And as we've mentioned, they automatically get the monitoring agent installed, so they're good and ready to go. 
And if I click PERFORMANCE MONITOR on the left, I can click add a rule.
Now when I add a rule over on the right, I can select a network, I can select a subnet, and I can choose connectivity to another subnet.
I can add exceptions and I can tell it I want to use ICMP versus TCP to test the connectivity.
And I can determine when it will generate an alert if the connectivity between those subnets is not available. So the default is to autodetect sudden changes. But we can say if there is a loss, a packet condition loss, greater than or equal to a certain percentage. Or latency, network latency, speed greater than or equal to a certain number of milliseconds. So network latency means network slow down issues. So we can have that trigger. So once we've got that done, then our rule will show up. And if I go back to the overview here for my workspace summary.
That's when, when you come into Network Performance Monitor, you get to see here that you've got some problems.

[Video description begins] He opens the DefaultWorkspace-048b82ac-4519-403b-ab05-6b4305502109-CCA blade. [Video description ends]

Potentially, hopefully not. So we know that within a Log Analytics workspace. If we scroll down and look at the workspace data sources that virtual machines can serve as a data source.

[Video description begins] He clicks an option called "Virtual machines" and the corresponding page opens in the content pane. [Video description ends]

And I've got a couple of them here, WinSrv2019-1, -2 and 3, they're added to this workspace. Of course, we can just click on it to open it up and connect or disconnect it.

[Video description begins] He clicks a Virtual machine called "WinSrv2019-1" and the corresponding blade opens. [Video description ends]

But once you actually connect a virtual machine to a workspace, the Microsoft monitoring agent is automatically installed in the VM.

[Video description begins] He closes the blade. [Video description ends]

And that way the VM can report back to this Log Analytics workspace. So let's just flip over and take a look at one of those virtual machines.

[Video description begins] He opens a new Microsoft Azure web portal. The Virtual machines blade is open. He clicks the WinSrv2019-1 virtual machine and the corresponding blade opens. It is divided into two parts: navigation pane and content pane. [Video description ends]

If I actually click to open it up, and if we take a look at the virtual machine extensions.

[Video description begins] He clicks an option called 'Extensions" in the navigation pane and the corresponding page opens in the content pane. it includes a table with three columns and three rows. The column headers are Name, Type, and Version. [Video description ends]

What will have been added because it won't have been there before is the Microsoft Azure monitoring dependency agent. That gets installed when you connect or link that VM to a workspace. Now in the case of Network Performance Monitoring, that's going to be important.

[Video description begins] He switches back to the DefaultWorkspace-048b82ac-4519-403b-ab05-6b4305502109-CCA | Virtual machines blade in the previous Microsoft Azure web portal. [Video description ends]

If we take a look at the result of our configuration. If we go under Workspace summary here in the Log Analytics workspace.

[Video description begins] He clicks the Workspace summary option in the navigation pane and the Overview blade opens. [Video description ends]

We could see that now that it's had time for those servers to start reporting back information about network connectivity. We're going to start seeing some potential alerts. I can see there's an alert here. There's 1 of 1 subnetwork link that is considered unhealthy. 

[Video description begins] He clicks the Network Performance Monitor option and the Network Performance Monitor blade opens. [Video description ends]

So if I click on that panel to open it up, then I can read more details about exactly what the issue is. So we can see that that health event was generated by a rule called Rule1. And if I kind of click on that rule to see what it's about, we've got a 100% transmission loss.

[Video description begins] He clicks a link called "Rule 1" and a blade called "Affected Subnetworks Link" opens. [Video description ends]

And we can see it's between subnets within the rule that were specified. And in this case, those subnets are the 10.0.1.0 subnet, and the 13.0.1.0 subnet. There's a link on the right that says View affected node links. So I could also click on that to get even further detail.

[Video description begins] A blade called "Node Links" opens. [Video description ends]

And from here I can see the node links where on the left I have the name of a virtual machine. And it's pointing to another one listed to the right of it. And I can see the IP address interfaces, and I can see in this case we have a 100% packet loss. Now, that often might be due to routing problems between subnets and so on. But this is one of the overall purposes of using Network Performance Monitor or NPM in Azure. To identify these types of network connectivity issues.

