                     Bullet Proof Local SEO 
                     Course Notes
                     
                     
Note -                      
Prior to the individual sections there is an introduction video detailing a basic introduction to
the topics covered in the sections.


                     MODULE 1 - ON-PAGE FACTORS
There is an introduction video which covers an overview on the material which will be covered in more depth in each section
People using the course should be familiar with HTML tags
Local businesses will look to rank on keyword & city
Author recommends site structure of top level domain name -> category name -> product name
If possible have links to place where customers can offer reviews which will improve rankings
N.A.P - Name Address Phone Number this is especially important for local businesses and should be on all pages
Ensure you have a least 1 map on the site
Try to have some authority links eg Business Bureaus
L.S.I - Latent Semantic Indexing, this is where keywords and similar words eg synonyms are examined for ranking

1.1 - Google Webmaster Tools
This section focuses on backend specifically in WordPress
Google webmaster tools - Now known as Google webmaster tools
A quick run through how to add your site to Google Search Console
Schema.org or structured data - a shorthand for Google Bot to understand what certain elements of your site are about. 
There are many ways to implement this on your site, by hand if you know the code, plug-ins can be used and tools. However 
ranking a local client especially having the correct type of schema data is very, very important and is a must do because
once Google Bot gets  to that page and then sees that schema data, it has a lot more trust with what that site says that 
it's about and it can match things up much more quickly.
If Google sees something as an issue and it's something that it keeps track of, then it is something that matters. Google 
did not pack this dashboard with stuff that does not matter to them. It's things that matter to them so it should matter to 
you. 


1.2 - WordPress Plugins
Discussion of various Wordpress Plugins used to help SEO
  - all in one SEO pack
  - Yoast
  - Google XML sitemap for videos
  - Google XML sitemaps (By Arnie Brechold) !!! important as is a ranking factor
  - Jetpack
 
 Dont write off Google Plus

1.3 - nTopic
Discussion of software service called Ntopic.org.
The service grades content based on LSI which is based on its relevance to the key words.
Author recommends using for content for
  - Google my business 
  - Bing business
  - Citation listings
If using a WordPress site, you can actually use this to score posts that you do
Site uses a subscription model, after you sign up you will get an API key
After you go to the site you will enter you API key and paste in content to be evaluated
In the author's experience pages that have a higher score in this, 90 or better, typically rank higher in Google.

1.4 - Review Badge-BL
Brightlocal.com - tools for local SEO
Author recommends that White Spark is better for citations
99% of information in reports you may not need
White label - meaning that the review code that's going to go on your client's site actually can have a back link to your 
site 
Full demo by the author of setting up a white label review badge using Brightlocal
Use industry links, your industry directory eg Business Listing, you want to show those. It's a trust factor as well as
being something to get some comments on those
Use any badges made on home page, contact pages or even as a site wide widget.
This also gives an easy way when you want to have customers leave reviews easily
You can setup the backlink to go to another client site

1.5 - Review Handout
https://whitespark.ca - Automated review handout generator is demonstrated
The company makes a suite of free tools available but you must register first


1.6 - Content Syndication
PBN - Private Blog Network is a network of authoritative websites used to build links to your money website(s) for the 
purpose of ranking higher in the Google search engine. A money website is the website you intend on ranking i.e. the one 
that actually makes money. This can also refer to a clients website.
Whenever you do a post in WordPress, you can choose to have that post automatically submitted out to Facebook, Twitter, 
Google+, Tumblr.
This is done with a plugin called Jetpack, the advantage is  giving you fresh content on your website and some social signals. 
Social Networks Auto-Poster is another Wordpress plugin which can be purchased and installed on Wordpress, once installed 
you are able to add all your social media accounts with the click of a button.


1.7 - Internal Linking
Internal links, meaning links that are on your site count just the same way that external links do, as far as Google is 
concerned. 
We know that when another site links to you that you get some sort of credit for it, but you, also, get credit when your site
internally links properly. 
There are different ways that you could utilize this technique but as usual, be cautious. The best way to do this technique 
is to start by making just a couple of changes. Let it sit for a couple of weeks. Make sure that there's no negative marks 
that come from it, and then if everything is great, move forward. 
Free 14 day trial available for crawling the site for SEO purposes used to demonstrate site crawling for links
  - https://netpeaksoftware.com/spider 
PR - Page Ranking 
This strategy is white hat, as long as you don't over optimize. It's very safe, and it actually, honestly, can be very, very
powerful. 
If you have a normal size local client site, then you are going to use about 1 or 2 per page
Also a quick demonstration of the SEO Internal Link Building plugin, adjustment of density is needed to avoid only linking
on one instance of the keyword


1.8 - Site Speed
There are over 200 factors that Google uses in order to rank a website.
There's many reasons why page speed is important, but the reason why it's important to help you rank is because Google knows
that pages that take longer to load than their average competitor are going to provide a poor experience for their user.
Google Developers PageSpeed Insights test - tool for analysing sites, the author recommend that you use Google's tool first.
Other tools available include GTMetrix
The author goes through a demo of Google Developers PageSpeed Insights test
There are two grade levels
  - Red which means that you should fix
  - Orange means its recommended that you fix
The test itself will give you instructions on how to repair issues but it maybe advisable to get a developer in if there is 
any doubt about what you are doing.
You may need to use caching programmes to increase site speed but make sure it doesn't cause conflicts
CDN - Content Delivery Network, instead of having dependencies stored locally a lot of site use CDN to reduce sizes 


1.9 - Site Security 1
Hacked in this context means access without authorisation
There are many different reasons for your site to be attacked and not all are malicious
Some hacks cannot be prevented eg Hosting being hacked
3 main reasons for site being hacked 
  - Weak Passwords
    - Always use strong passwords
    - Rename Admin account on Wordpress
    - Two Factor Authentication(Recommended for higher value sites)
    - Install security software eg Sucuri or Wordfence
  - Plugin Leaks
    - Keep plugins updated regularly
  - Themes
    - Use theme authenticity checker tool (author recommended)


1.10 - Site Security 2
What to do if your site is hacked
Firstly dont panic!!!
Login to CPanel and change passwords
Restore from a backup from before the attack(you may need to ask host)
Perform full scan of site for malware (may need site to be downloaded)
Do all the steps from the previous section again

