                    MODULE 2 - OFF-PAGE FACTORS
2.1a - Google MyBusiness
2 basic options. 
 - 1 - The client already has a page, in which case you’re going to claim it, edit to make sure that it’s set up and optimized properly.
 - 2 - The client does not have an account yet on Google My Business. 
Demonstration of setting up a business on Google My Business
*** Important that you fill out everything that needs to be filled out properly
https://itouchmap.com/latlong.html - Latitude and Longitude of a Point (Free)
http://www.geoimgr.com/en/tool - a simple web-tool for geotagging photos and image
Geotagging images is very important for local SEO and should not be underestimated
Images on page as well as site should be tagged


2.1b - Bing Business
Bing Places is Bing's comparable product to Google My Business
You can actually get a bit of business from this. Remember that anyone who buys a Windows PC, laptop or desktop or Surface tablet, 
it comes with Bing as the default search provider and the more older the demographic, the more likely they are just to go with what 
they are given as an option.
Setup demonstration - a lot of what was done to setup Google business is the same
You have to have a Microsoft account
Have a look at competition in Bing to see who is ranking and use them as a guide to business categories
Use high resolution images
Length of business description is like in Google a ranking factor so ensure that the description is long enough and has the proper
keywords.
To verify you will need a domain level email address


2.1c - Bing Webmaster Tools
Bing has its own suite of Webmaster tools
Quick to master if you have used Google Webmaster
To rank in Bing is to get the sites in both of those tools, tactics will be similar to ones used on Google
You need a Microsoft account for this a Hotmail account, an Outlook account, et cetera.
Account will need to be verified
Wordpress has a plugin called Bing Webmaster Tools.
Geo-Targeting is again a must
Remember to do markup validation at Schema.org


2.1d - Apple Maps
A quick demo of Apple Maps product
Apple maps is Apple's version of Bing Business and Google My Business
The future of search is going to be voice search with people using their smartphones and other smart devices
You have to go to mapsconnect.apple.com. and need an ID
They are not going to allow residential addresses to be listed in Maps for Businesses
Its very important to keep your NAP consistent across every citation
You will need to validate your account
Part of the validation process for Apple is add accounts eg Facebook, Twitter


2.2a - Citations
A citation in this context simply means a local business directory that you use like Yelp or MerchantCircle or Foursquare
These are local directories that will allow you to have a listing and having an accurate listing in them is very important
for your local business
Moz.com - local search ranking factor  these results are phoned in by real SEOs
The number one most important thing is actually on-page signals
Many different ways that you can get citations. You can go on fiber and buy citations or use a service like HOF local for
instance to buy citations
There's several places that you can get citation sources from. Whitespark, BrightLocal is good, Local Visibility is good, BLI is good, 
there are several and the author recommends Whitespark
The most damaging thing that for a local client is having inaccurate citations where the NAP doesn't match
Whitespark is about $20 per month subscription
Do not get a generic list for the city or for the niche 
Get citations that the people who are winning are already using
How many citations, just depends on the niche
The basics for a citation audit would be looking in a couple of places to see what they tell you eg Yext, 
Subscription in available at Yext.com. 
Another thing that you can do is go to Moz.com/local/search
It's typically very easy to get rid of inaccurate citations.
If a client has been to business for awhile, then you're not going to start by building citations, you're going to start by auditing 
citations
There is no link velocity when it comes to citations and directories


2.2b - Rich Media Citations
Rich media citations - means citation sources that are based on images or videos.
It's very important that you combine the rich media citations with the traditional citations
Pick sites that have good domain authority
Some sites include
 - Imgur
 - Photobucket
 - DeviantArt
 - Shutterfly
 - ImageShack
 - SmugMug
 - Picasa
 - Snapfish
Images will need to be Geotagged as like before
Video is basically going to be the same thing
The only real difference is that when doing these videos make sure to do the geotagging in the video itself
Video sites include
 - Youtube
 - Daily Motion
 - Vimeo 
Traffic Geyeser is mentioned as a piece of software to upload videos to multiple sites


2.2c - Citation Aggregators
Often when you take over a new client, a lot of their citation information is messed up.
A lot of them have duplicate listings, and they have information that's incorrect across multiple citation sources
If Yelp has duplicate entries for your business, then you will use the Yelp process for repairing that.
Top level aggregators
 - Infogroup -- http://www.expressupdate.com/search
 - Localeze -- https://www.neustarlocaleze.biz
 - Acxiom -- http://www.acxiom.com
 - Factual -- https://www.factual.com
 - Foursquare -- https://foursquare.com
Process is
 - You go and you setup your Google My Business page, and you give it a certain address.
 - Google goes out, and it looks on a top level aggregators  eg Localeze
 - And Localeze has a different address for that business. 
 - Google trusts Localeze a whole hell of a lot more than it trust you with a brand new Google My Business listing. 
 - Many times it will choose to use the information from Localeze. 
 - Google looks to these for citation information. 
You definitely want to be listed in these top five. 
Not being in the means that the visibility for this company is hampered right now. 
If it's not here, the business isn't in a significant number of databases or directory sites that it wants to be in. 

2.3a - Reviews Core

2.3b - Reviews Schema

2.4 - Web 2.0

2.5 - Authority Links

2.6 - Press Releases
                     
                     
                     
                     MODULE 3 - SOCIAL SIGNALS
3.1 - Addmefast.com

3.2 - Social ADR

3.3 - Social Signal Mapping & Planning
                     
                     
                     
                     MODULE 4 - CLIENTS
4.1 - Picking Clients
 
4.2 - Discovery Form
 
4.3 - Intake Form
 
4.4 - Intro to Prospecting
 
4.5 - Prospecting 1 - MLM
 
4.6 - Prospecting 2 - Scratch My Back
 
4.7 - Prospecting 3 - Get Out There
 
4.8 - Follow The Money
 
4.9 - Page 2
 
4.10 - Pricing Intro
 
4.11 - Pricing Clients 1
 
4.12 - Pricing Clients 2
 
4.13 - Pricing Table
 
4.14 - Low Volume Keywords
 
4.15 - Intro to Retention
 
                     
                     
                     MODULE 5 - STRATEGY
5.1 - Level 1 Strategy
 
5.2 - Level 2 Strategy
