Instruction
Hello and welcome to Part 6 of our course. In this part, we're going to deal with aggregate functions. COUNT, AVG, MIN, MAX ... 
You know these already, but you'll now have a chance to learn some new information.
Let's not waste any time. Today, we have managed to obtain some data from a translation agency. Let's find out what we're going to deal with.

Exercise
Select all the information from the first table: client.
Each client (company) has an id and a name. Not really complicated, right? Let's move on when you're done.

Solution
select * from client


Exercise
Select all the information from the second table: translator.
As you can see, the table presents some of the translators that the agency contracts with.
Each translator has: an id, a first and last name, and a start_date, which is the date on which the agreement was signed and the contract was officially started.

Solution
select * from translator


Exercise
The last table is a bit more complicated. It has many rows and many columns.
Select all the information from the last table: project. 
Note that you won't see all the rows present in the table – our platform displays only a limited number of rows for readability.
You can find the project_id, client_id and translator_id, of course. These columns should be clear. Then, you can also see:

    the start – that is, when the client commissioned the project.
    the deadline – when the project is due.

Afterward, we can see the price the client paid, the number of words for translation and two languages:

    the source language (lang_from),
    the target language (lang_to).

The final column (feedback) provides the client's feedback. Positive numbers mean that the client was very satisfied, 
negative ones mean that the client complained to some extent about the quality.

Solution
select * from project



Instruction
Nice. Now that you know the tables, let's get down to work.
We'll start off with a function you already know: COUNT(*), which is used to count all the rows in the result set. Just like this:

SELECT COUNT(*)
FROM translator
WHERE start_date > '2016-01-01';

The above query will provide the number of translators who started contracting with the translation agency on January 1, 2016 or later
