Exercise
For each slogan, print the following: 'X. Y', where X is the item name and Y is the text of the slogan. Name the column name_text.

Solution
select i.name ||'.'||' '|| s.text as name_text 
from item i
join slogan s
on i.id = s.item_id



Instruction
The functions we've learned so far operated on all the string values, but we can also manipulate certain fragments or even single letters.
We'll start off with substring(x, y). Take a look:

SELECT substring(name, 2)
FROM item;

What does the function substring do? It returns part of the string starting from the character specified as y, which must be an integer value.
In this case, if the name is 'TripCare' and y = 2, we'll get 'ripCare' as the result, because the database will start at the second character, which is 'r'.
If the integer y you provide is larger than the whole string length, then you will get an empty string '' as a result.
In Oracle, this function is called substr().

Exercise
Show the full name of each item and each name starting from the 3rd character. Name the second column name_substring.

Solution
select name, substring(name, 3) as name_substring
from item



Instruction
Perfect. There is also another, extended version of substring. Take a look:

SELECT substring(name, 2, 3) AS name_substring
FROM item;

In the above example, substring received an additional number (3). In this way, we can specify the length of the substring we want to get.
For the name 'TripCare', we'll get 'rip', because we start at letter 2 (which is 'r') and take 3 of them('r', 'I' and 'p').
Again, if you start from a number which exceeds the length of the whole string, you will get an empty string.
If the second number you provide is bigger than the length to the end of the string, the database will simply return the string until its end.
However, in Oracle this function is called substr().#

Exercise
For each slogan, show its text and the characters from 3 to 8 of that text. Name the second column text_substring.

Solution
select text, substring(text, 3, 6)
as text_substring
from slogan

