Exercise
Each warrior (class = 'warrior') at level 3 or higher can perform a special attack whose damage is calculated as follows: 
its strength plus one fourth of its hp, and then multiplied by the absolute value of stat_modifier. Round this column to 2 decimal places.

Show the name and special attack damage (column damage) calculated for those characters which have the attack available.

Solution
select name,
round((strength+0.25*hp)*abs(stat_modifier), 2)
as damage
from character
where level >= 3
and class='warrior'


Exercise
For players with IDs equal to 1 and 5, show firstname and lastname together with the level, height rounded to two decimal places, and account_balance rounded down. 
The column names should be: firstname, lastname, level, height, and account_balance.

Solution
select p.firstname, p.lastname,
c.level, 
round(cast(c.height as decimal), 2) as height, 
floor(c.account_balance) as account_balance
from character c
join player p
on p.id = c.player_id
where p.id in(1, 5)



Instruction
Let's introduce the tables we're going to work with. A European airline called PerfectAir provided some of its data to us. 
Let's see what we have received from them.

Exercise
Select all the information for the table route.
The table route keeps track of the destinations offered by PerfectAir. Each route has:

    an ID code used for identification.
    the international code of the departure airport (from_airport).
    the international code of the arrival airport (to_airport).
    total distance of the route (distance) expressed in kilometers.
    departure which stores the scheduled time of departure.
    arrival containing information about planned time of arrival.

Keep in mind that both of the time values are shown in Central European Time.

Solution
select * from route


Exercise
Select all the information for the table aircraft.
PerfectAir has its own fleet and each aircraft is listed in the table. An aircraft has an ID and model. The table also stores columns:

    produced – when the production of the aircraft was officially completed and the aircraft was sold.
    launched – when the aircraft took its first flight for PerfectAir.

These two dates may differ significantly when, e.g., PerfectAir bought a used aircraft. 
You may have noticed that launched is a more accurate column (it shows the time too). 
This is because PerfectAir wants to note the exact point in time when the aircraft took off the ground for the first time.

The last column is withdrawn – an exact point in time where the aircraft landed for the last time before it was retired.

Solution
select * from aircraft


Exercise
Select all the information for the table flight.
This table lists specific flights (id) on a specific route (route_code) with a specific aircraft (aircraft_id) on a specific date (date).
The delay column is expressed in minutes. A positive value in this column means that the arrival was indeed delayed.
A negative value indicates that the plane landed ahead of schedule.

Solution
select * from flight


Exercise
Select the column produced from the table aircraft and take a look at the date format.

Solution
select produced from aircraft



Instruction
As you can see, dates are shown in the following format: YYYY-MM-DD. First we provide the year, then the month, finally the day. 
Be aware, though, that some databases may use other formats, depending on the database configuration. 
If we want to use dates in our queries, then we need to provide them within apostrophes:

SELECT
  id,
  model
FROM aircraft
WHERE produced = '2012-04-05';

The above query will select the id and model of all the aircraft produced on April 5, 2012.

Exercise
Select the columns id, model and produced for those aircraft which were produced on April 6, 2008 or March 1, 2010.

Solution
select id, model, produced
from aircraft 
where produced = '2008-04-06' 
or produced = '2010-03-01'
