Instruction
Perfect! As you can see, we got a NULL when one of the concatenated columns was a NULL.
The same goes for mathematical operators: +, -, *, /. Adding a NULL value to something will return NULL. 
Similarly, multiplying two values, of which one is NULL, will always return NULL.

Exercise
A new tax has been imposed on all the products, which is 2% of the final price. 
Show all product names with their old price (column name old_price) and new price rounded to two decimal points (column name new_price). 
Note what happens when there is no price.

Solution
select name, price as old_price,
round(price * 1.02, 2) as new_price
from product



Instruction
Correct! The last thing we want to warn you about is the function length(x), which will also return NULL when x is NULL. This is why the query:

SELECT *
FROM product
WHERE length(category) < 20;

will not return a row with a NULL category. Is this correct? Again, it depends on what you need.

Exercise
Mr Amund wants to pick products with short names for his new advertisement. 
Show the names of all products shorter than 8 characters or those which have a NULL name. 
Show the description as the second column so that Mr Amund can think of a (short) name if it's missing for a certain product before the advertisement is published

Solution
select name, description
from product
where length(name) < 8
or name is null



Instruction
Perfect answer! Well, as you can see, NULLs can be troublesome. This is why SQL features a function to help you tackle them: COALESCE(x,y).
COALESCE(x,y) returns the first of the two values (x or y) which is not a NULL. Check out the example:

SELECT name, COALESCE(category, 'none')
FROM product;

If a product has a category in the above query, it will be shown. If it has a NULL category, the query will show 'none' instead.
If you're a non-native English speaker, then you may wonder what the word coalesce means. 
It is a verb which can be understood as 'to come together to form one group or mass'. 
You can use it literally (ingredients can coalesce) or figuratively (ideas can coalesce, too). Now you understand the choice of the word in SQL.

Exercise
Select the names and categories for all products. If any of the columns is a NULL, write 'n/a' instead. Name the columns name and category.

