Instruction
Oops! As you can see, the error occurs even if there is a single row with a 0 value in the denominator. 
How can we deal with this? There are a few ways to solve the problem.
For now, you can use the good old WHERE clause to filter out those rows which contain a 0:

WHERE column_name != 0;

You'll get to know other methods of dealing with division by zero in further parts of our course.

Exercise
For each character, show its name and try to divide its mp by its wisdom. Filter out rows with 0 wisdom points. Name the second column ratio.

Solution
select name, cast(mp as numeric)/wisdom as ratio
from character
where wisdom != 0



Instruction
Okay. There is one more useful function related to division. This function is mod(x,y), which returns the remainder of x divided by y.

For instance, mod(9,7) will return 2, because 9/7 is 1 with 2 as the remainder.

In SQL Server the operator to compute the remainder is %: 9%7 returns 2. This % operator is supported by PostgreSQL and MySQL, but not by Oracle.

Exercise
In our game, you can increase your strength by 1 if you sacrifice 7 hp.
For each character, show its name and calculate how many health points will be left if the player decides to sacrifice the maximum number of hp. 
Name the second column health_points.

Solution
select name, mod(hp, 7) as health_points
from character



Instruction
Now that you know how to subtract and divide, we'll talk about other numerical functions. 
One of them is round(x). This function will round the number within parentheses to the nearest integer number. 
This is standard mathematical rounding: any decimal part equal to or greater than 0.5 will be rounded up.

SELECT
  round(account_balance) AS rounded_account_balance
FROM character
WHERE id = 1;

The above query will take the account_balance of the character with id = 1 (the account_balance is 899.34) and round it to the nearest integer (899 in this case).

Exercise
For each character, show its name, its account_balance and its account_balance rounded to the nearest integer (name this column rounded_account_balance). 
Notice how mathematical rounding is applied.

Solution
