                    AZ900 Microsoft Azure Cloud Fundamentals 2021
                    Course Notes Part 24


Hybrid Cloud
  - A Hybrid Cloud computing model, combines both private and public clouds
    - Where a private cloud refers to private infrastructure owned and used by a single organization
    - That follows cloud computing characteristics, such as metered usage, self-provisioning and so on, as well as using public cloud provider solutions
    - But a hybrid cloud can also mean that you are linking your on-premises IT infrastructure with the public cloud
    - Examples of this would include, using a site-to-site VPN, between your on-premises network and the cloud.
  - Essentially, extending your on-premises network environment into the cloud environment 
    - Or even linking your on-premises identity store like Microsoft Active Directory with Active Directory in the cloud
    - To allow users to sign-in once with their on-premises credentials, yet still be authorized to use cloud apps
    - There are a number of variations then on what a hybrid cloud is
    - In the public cloud, you might use this, so you could work with services, that don't deal with sensitive data
    - You also want the benefits of scalability in the public cloud, whereby you might use the private cloud to store more sensitive data
    - However, that's not to say in any way that storing anything in the cloud is less secure than storing it on-premises.
  - We can use a hybrid cloud environment for big data operations
    - Big data refers to the vast amounts of data, even from streaming over the network, over the Internet
    - Such as data coming in from news feeds, data coming in from IoT devices, it could be coming from anywhere
    - But when we have vast amounts of data, it makes sense that we have a scalable environment to analyze that data
    - And an easy and cheap way to do that is in the public cloud, but that's public cloud.
  - What's the take on hybrid? Well, the hybrid kicks in, because you might have some of those data feeds sourced from your on-premises network
    - Or perhaps your analysis tools are on-premises, but you want big data stored in the cloud
    - Another use case would be, cloud backup and replication
    - For instance, you might install an agent on your on-premises servers or even devices
    - It doesn't have to be a server that periodically on a schedule backs data up to the cloud environment, the public cloud
    - So you've got a link between your on-premises environment and the cloud in terms of backup, even replication.
  - So not only backups, but you might have live replica data, replicated from an on-premises file server into the cloud
    - And whether content is changed in the cloud or on-premises, it synchronizes to the other location
    - You might use a hybrid solution for the short term because you are adopting cloud computing
    - You want to migrate some of your on-premises components into the cloud, such as data, or applications, or virtual machines, that type of thing
    - The other thing to think about with the hybrid cloud is that, at least on the public cloud computing side, you're only paying for resources that are used.
  - You should therefore always avoid idle cloud resources, especially things like databases that you deploy in the cloud as a managed service
    - Meaning you don't have to worry with the underlying servers to get that up and running
    - Don't leave those things running because you will incur charges, only leave them running if they need to be left running.


Community Cloud
  - A community cloud, is used amongst organizations that have similar IT needs
    - Such as similar underlying compute requirements, perhaps for graphics processing
    - Similar storage requirements, such as within national boundaries
    - Similar security requirements, such as the protection of sensitive data, using very specific tools and methods, and also scalability
    - In essence, a community cloud is cloud computing, but it's kind of a subset of it where it's a little bit more specialized and caters to more specific needs
    - Community cloud characteristics include a shared infrastructure though this is true with all cloud computing models except for private.
  - Understand that the organizations or entities that might have similar computing needs, could be both in the private sector and/or at the government level
    - Some public cloud service providers, offer government cloud solutions.
    - When should an organization use the community cloud solution
    - Well, you probably have to, if it's a government agency that must meet very strict security requirements
    - For regulatory compliance related to processing, storing, and collecting things like health information, financial records, legal documents
    - It's common then to see in the healthcare industry, for example, community clouds being used that meet the specific security 
    - And operational requirements, of that type of industry.


Cloud Migration Risks and Benefits
Organizations that assess moving to the cloud, need to weigh the benefits of cloud computing along with the risks to determine which action should be taken. One of the benefits of migrating to the cloud is reduced capital costs. Now, in the public cloud computing environment, we are using the cloud service provider's underlying infrastructure. Their physical servers, their storage arrays, their network equipment. Which means that we as the customer, do not have to put up the money upfront to acquire that hardware infrastructure, hence, reduced capital costs.
On-demand scalability is a benefit of the cloud. If we determine that we need more power in a virtual machine, we can resize it with a click of a button, and add more RAM or virtual CPUs. If we need more storage space, we can do that quickly. If we need to have more virtual machines running in a cluster to support an app, to improve performance, we can do that very quickly and easily without any underlying technical knowledge. So on demand scalability, is a very important benefit related to cloud computing.
Disaster recovery, many organizations actually use the public cloud as an alternate recovery site. Now this takes proactive planning ahead of time, meaning that you might replicate virtual machines which run applications and data to alternate geographical locations, essentially, to other data centers owned by the cloud service provider. So that in the event of a regional disaster, for example, you've already got your systems and your data running elsewhere. So that can minimize business disruptions. Remote access to applications. Well, when you're running things in the cloud, then you can access them from anywhere.
Now, of course, we have security rules that are in place to limit traffic flow, but the potential is there to allow that to happen, and depending on the specific type of migration scenario you're talking about, you could result with less administrative responsibility. So for example, imagine that you are moving from an on-premises mail server that your IT team must maintain, where all the user mailboxes are stored. Let's say you're moving from that, to a cloud hosted email solution. You don't have to worry about the server anymore.
You can just add users and licenses with a click of a button, and so that means then in that particular example that you don't have to worry about updating the mail server software or the underlying operating system running the mail server. That would then become the responsibility, of the cloud service provider. So that's definitely a perceived benefit. But there's no gain without some kind of undertaken risk. One is proprietary technologies. If a cloud service provider is offering their services or data exchange formats over the network and with files in a very specific format, that could make it difficult to get your data out of that cloud, back on premises or to a different cloud provider.
Then there's network latency and downtime of services, which are potential risks. However, remember that public cloud service providers have a service level agreement that guarantees uptime on a monthly basis, and so usually the risk is more prevalent on the customer side, meaning that if we only have a single Internet connection, linking an on premises office to the cloud and we depend on the cloud, then we should probably consider having a secondary Internet connection to the cloud from a different Internet service provider to increase resiliency against failure.
The other thing to think about is data sensitivity. So, you might have certain laws or regulations that require data to be collected, processed, stored, shared, and archived in a very specific way. So in order to comply with these laws and regulations, it would be upon you, the cloud customer, to configure settings appropriately, to meet those data sensitivity requirements.


Common Cloud Vulnerabilities
One important aspect of properly using cloud computing is thinking about common cloud vulnerabilities. Many of which are no different than what you would experience on-premises. So it all boils down to how you configure and use these services. Let's start by talking about data assets, such as databases or files containing sensitive information. One problem is not encrypting that information. Often, encryption is automatically put in place over the network such as through HTTPS communications, very common.
But what's less common is enforcing encryption for everything that gets stored, at least everything that is considered sensitive. Now, many public cloud providers will automatically encrypt content stored in the cloud. But otherwise, it's always an option for the cloud customer if it's not turned on automatically, and also, customers will always have the ability to use their own custom encryption keys that are in their control for their cloud data that's encrypted. The other possible issue related to data assets is more on the administrative side. Where a data asset is important, also cloud resources are important such as cloud virtual machines running a mission critical app.
So the principle of least privilege, or PoLP, states that only the permissions required to perform a job task should be granted and nothing more, and so principle at least privilege abuse could be a problem where we might simply grant too many permissions to cloud resources, such as to other administrators, and therefore they might mistakenly delete virtual machines that are critical, or deploy too many of them and not shut them down, which means the organization is paying for those unnecessarily, and so what can be done then is to use role-based access control or RBAC.
In other words, if you need someone to be able to manage your virtual machine in the cloud, let's say, but not actually getting to the data within it, we could use a role, that would allow them to manage the virtual machine, and then that would take care of that problem. They wouldn't have any additional permission. So RBAC is an important consideration when it comes to security in cloud computing. Then there's users and devices. For example, instead of going with just username and password, which constitutes single factor authentication, because it's both something you know, you might use multi-factor authentication for all cloud user accounts.
Now, multi-factor authentication uses another authentication factor, such as requiring the possession of a smartphone, where a six digit PIN might be sent. That must be used in addition to a username and password to authenticate. So something you know, plus something you have. The other thing is to harden all user devices. All it takes is a single compromised smartphone that has access to cloud resources to start a security breach or some kind of a malware infection in the cloud.
So always remember that every endpoint device, whether it be a smartphone, a tablet, an industry specific device connected to the cloud. All of these items need to be secured to reduce their attack surface. Then there's the insider abuse. There is the potential for staff or cloud administrators to damage or exfiltrate information. One of the things that we can apply in a cloud computing environment is data loss prevention policies, otherwise called DLP policies.
Data loss prevention, has rules that looks at the type of information or data being worked with, and if it, for example, determines that maybe there's credit card numbers in it, it can automatically encrypt and prevent forwarding of that information through email, as just one example.Then, of course, auditing. Auditing allows for accountability. We can track not only user activity, but also device activity that might be abnormal, such as devices authenticating to a VPN in the middle of the night when that normally does not happen, and many public cloud service providers have mechanisms in place to automatically detect things like this, suspicious login activity.


Azure Virtual Machines
  - One of the great things about deploying virtual machines in the Azure cloud is how easy and rapidly those virtual machines can be provisioned.
  - Whether using command line tools or the Azure portal, you can deploy Windows and Linux virtual machines in the Azure cloud
    - The usage fees that we are charged for that is based on a couple of items, such as the virtual machine size
    - Which really determines the horsepower that virtual machine has when it's running.
  - Speaking of when a virtual machine is running, you are also charged for the amount of time virtual machines are left running. So when you don't need them to be running, perhaps if you're testing something, make sure to shut down virtual machines, and you might even delete the virtual machine if you no longer need it. There are a lot of factors to consider when you deploy and manage virtual machines in Azure.
We've mentioned the VM size, which consists of things like the number of virtual CPUs, the amount of RAM, and the disk IOPS, the input/output operations per second. So more of these items is better for performance but, of course, you're going to be paying more. But you might need more of RAM or more vCPUs to support the workload running within the VM.
When you deploy a VM, you deploy it into an Azure region or location. And so you should consider this because you might want to deploy it in a region that is geographically close to the user base that will require access to that virtual machine. Azure Virtual Machines have an operating system disk. But you can create separate independent managed disks that you can then attach to virtual machines or detach as needed, and they show up as data disks within the virtual machine operating system.
So in the virtual machine operating system, you still have to treat it as a new disk and initialize a partition and format it. Virtual machines can also have extensions. These are like little software agents that run within the VM operating system. And you might do this for the purposes of things like security. You might want some kind of anti-malware scanner running as an extension within your VM, or a backup agent, or even script support agents, such as for PowerShell desired state configuration.

When you deploy your Azure Virtual Machine, be it Windows or Linux, you also have to consider the Azure virtual network and subnet into which you are deploying it. Which also means that we have to think about the IP addressing that will be assumed from a subnet, or whether or not you need a public IP address for a virtual machine if you need to access it from the outside, such as from an on-premises network.

The thing to consider is, let's say that you're going to deploy five virtual machines into the same Azure virtual subnet. Well, instead of assigning five public IP addresses to each of them, you might consider assigning only one, which gives you a way in, kind of as a jump box. And once you're in, then you connect to the private IP addresses of the other four virtual machines. With Azure Windows Virtual Machines, we need to specify the logon credentials.

In other words, the username and the password that we'll use when we authenticate to it using Remote Desktop Protocol, or RDP. You need to make sure that any firewalls between a client device trying to connect to your Azure Windows Virtual Machine and it allows RDP traffic over port 3389. You can also, when you are deploying or creating a new virtual machine, add it to an availability set. Availability sets group virtual machines together for high availability.

However, the virtual machines in the set don't have to be exactly the same. But you can only do that when you are creating the virtual machine added to an availability set. You should also consider your backup strategy for your Azure virtual machine. Whether you're going to have extensions in the VM that support backup, or whether you're going to be using some kind of a backup vault, and we'll talk about that later.

Azure Linux Virtual Machines can use either username and password authentication or public key authentication, where you don't have to use the password. However, you have to have a public and a private key pair, where the public key is defined with the Azure Linux Virtual Machine, and you would keep the private key, for example, with your on-premises station. We can connect using Secure Shell, or SSH, over port 22, and so your firewalls have to allow SSH traffic for this to work.

Just like when working with Windows Azure Virtual Machines, when we deploy a Linux virtual machine at that time, we can also add it to an availability set a virtual machine availability set for high availability. And we should also consider our backup strategy, whether it's an extension, or whether we have a script running within the virtual machine, or whether we're going to use some kind of a recovery services vault backup solution. When you deploy a manual virtual machine in Azure, meaning it's Infrastructure as a Service, or IaaS,
it means that you have full configuration control of that virtual machine and the operating system and software running within it. Which means that you are responsible for updating those things. However, there's also the notion of managed VMs. This means that virtual machines in some cases can be deployed automatically for you depending on the service you choose, like when you deploy a higher level service like Azure SQL Database. So as such, you have limited configuration control for managed virtual machines. To work with virtual machines in Azure, we can use the Azure Portal.
There's also Azure PowerShell commandlets, the Azure CLI. An ARM template can be used, where you define one or more virtual machines, even other types of resources, that can be deployed and managed through the ARM template. And the ARM template can be itself deployed through the Portal or through PowerShell or the CLI. And developers can also use client SDKs and REST APIs to programatically talk to Azure resources like virtual machines.


Windows Azure Virtual Machine Deployment
There are a few ways that you can end up having a virtual machine running in the Azure Cloud. One way would be to migrate an on-premises server into the cloud.
Or you might use a managed service in Azure. In other words, you might configure a service offering that takes care of setting up the virtual machines for you. And of course, you could then manually deploy virtual machines,
in this case using the Azure portal. So one way to do that here in the Azure portal is to click Virtual machines when you're looking at the Azure home page.

[Video description begins] He clicks the drop down arrow in the Operating System field. The menu has Select all option at the top and it is checked now. Below are check boxes grouped by operating systems such as Windows and Linux. He unchecks Select all. [Video description ends]

That puts you in the Virtual machines view where you could click Add to add a virtual machine.

[Video description begins] He checks the Windows 2016 Server check box in the Windows group. The search results show a list of tutorials. [Video description ends]

But there are other ways. We could also click Create a resource over on the left. And under the Compute section, we can see some featured virtual machine images like Windows Server 2016 Datacenter. But we can also click See all, where we can even filter this list of virtual machine images. So for Operating System, for example, I can uncheck Select all and maybe I'm only interested in Windows Server 2016. So I can turn that on and the list gets filtered to show me only that.

[Video description begins] He clicks Create a resource in the navigator. A window titled New opens. In the search field, he types template and selects Template deployment from search results. A new window titled Template deployment opens. It has brief explanation about template deployment. A button captioned Create is at the bottom of the window. [Video description ends]

Notice that we are getting not only Windows Server 2016 but also apps installed within it like SQL server.

[Video description begins] A new window titled Custom deployment opens. There are 3 sections here- Learn about template deployment, Common templates, and Load a GitHub quickstart template. The first section has 2 links- Read the docs and Build your own template in the editor. The next section has 4 links- Create a Linux virtual machine, Create a Windows virtual machine, Create a web app, and Create a SQL database. In the last section is a field captioned Select a template. [Video description ends]

BYOL, as seen here, stands for Bring Your Own License. And so it would let you reuse any SQL Server 2016 Enterprise licenses you might already have here in the cloud. Another option for deploying a virtual machine here in the portal would be to click Create a resource. And if I search for template, I could choose Template deployment, then I can click Create. We're talking about ARM templates here, Azure Resource Manager. And what we could do is build our own template and

[Video description begins] He closes the window without saving any changes. [Video description ends]

manually specify that we want to create one or more virtual machines. We could even import any existing template files, you might have to do that.

[Video description begins] He returns to the Azure home page and clicks Virtual machines again. Then he clicks the Add button. [Video description ends]

There's also templates here to create a Linux virtual machine, Windows.

[Video description begins] The Create a virtual machine window opens on the right. [Video description ends]

We can ever refer to some templates available on the GitHub community that deal with the creation of the virtual machines.

[Video description begins] In the PROJECT DETAILS section, he leaves the default value of Pay-As-You-Go in the Subscription field, and selects Rg1 in the Resource group field. [Video description ends]

So there are a lot of ways to do it and this is just in the portal. We haven't even talked yet about how to do that in the command line tools, but we'll do that on the demos. So I'm going to go ahead and close out of this. And I'm going to go back to the Virtual machines view on the left and I'll click the Add button here, we're going to do it this way. So the first thing we have to do is tie this to a subscription and then deploy it into a resource group. So I'm going to deploy this into an existing resource group I have called Rg1, then the virtual machine name. It's very important that we're aware of what types of characters are allowed.

[Video description begins] He types a name in the Virtual machine name field. Since the name does not fulfil naming convention rules in Azure, the field gets highlighted in red and rules for naming appear below the field. There are 3 rules in all, and as he types any name, the rule which is violated gets a red cross mark in front of it. [Video description ends]

So here, I've got a bunch of capital letters and weird symbols of my virtual machine name. And it tells me that the virtual machine name can't contain non-ASCII or special characters.

[Video description begins] He leaves the default value of No infrastructure redundancy required in the Availability options field. [Video description ends]

Well, that's fine. Now like all Azure resource deployments, we have to have first considered a naming standard. I'm going to call this eastwindowsvm1. So that's the name of my virtual machine. Then I have to deploy it in a specific Azure region. So I'm going to go ahead and choose here Canada East. I'm not going to configure any availability options, but I'm certainly interested in the image. Here, it's got Ubuntu server, well, that's Linux. If I open this drop down list, I can see I can choose from other items including Windows Server 2016 Datacenter. Now you always have to consider what kind of workload will run, because that's going to determine which operating system you need to support that workload. So in this case, if I've already thought about that,

[Video description begins] A new window titled Select a VM size opens. It has a Search field on top and various filter options, namely Size, Generation, Family, and Premium disk. There is an Add filter button. A table with 12 of 165 VM sizes display. The table has columns VM SIZE, OFFERING, FAMILY, VCPUS, RAM, DATA, MAX IOPS, TEMPORARY STORAGE, PREMIUM DISK STORAGE, and COST/MONTH. [Video description ends]

I'll choose Windows Server 2016 Datacenter. Now at the same time, I've got a link to browse all images and disks if I want to see more, but that's the selection I need. So I'm good with that. The sizing here determines how much horsepower is available. So here, we've got one virtual CPU and 3.5 gigabytes of memory.

[Video description begins] The default size is Standard DS 1 v2. [Video description ends]

Again, if we consider the workload that this virtual machine will be

[Video description begins] The next section is titled ADMINISTRATOR ACCOUNT. It has 3 fields- Username, Password, and Confirm password. [Video description ends]

supporting, we'll be able to determine if that makes sense or not. And if it doesn't, I can click Change size. Naturally, the more vCPUs and RAM and the faster disk speed for Max IOPs that you select, the more cost you will incur. And we can see that over here in the cost per month estimation over on the right hand column.

[Video description begins] Naming rules for Username field appear. Rule 1 is that Username cannot contain special characters or end with period. Rule 2 is that Username must not include reserved words. Rule 3 is that the value is in between 1 and 32 characters long. [Video description ends]

However, if I'm happy with the default sizing that was selected, I can leave it.

[Video description begins] The next section is INBOUND PORT RULES. It has one compulsory field- Public inbound ports with 2 radio options - None and Allow selected ports. The default value is None. The next field is Select inbound ports. [Video description ends]

The next thing is credentials for our new virtual machine. So I'm going to fill in a username and a password and I'll confirm that same password.

[Video description begins] The last section is SAVE MONEY. There is just one field -Already have a Windows license? And is has two radio options- Yes and No. No is the deafult value. [Video description ends]

Now bear in mind, you won't be able to use things like Administrator because that's considered a reserved word. So I'm just going to use a user here, cirving, I've specified and

[Video description begins] The next tab, Disks, gets activated now. Its first section is titled DISK OPTIONS. It has one drop-down field- OS disk type, with a default value of Premium SSD. An additional field is Enable Ultra SSD compatibility (Preview) with 2 radio options- Yes and No. No is the default value. This field is disabled now. [Video description ends]

confirmed a password. I can also at this point in time determine what type of inbound network traffic I want to allow. I'm going to leave the default selections because we'll be talking about firewalls and inbound and outbound allowed traffic in other demos. And down below it says, do you already have a Windows license?

[Video description begins] The next section is titled DATA DISKS. No data disks are available now. There are links to create and attach a new disk, and to attach an existing disk. [Video description ends]

Well, we do not, so I'm going to leave it on the default of No. We don't have a license that we can reuse. I'm going to click Next to go to the disks configuration. Here we can determine if we want to use Premium SSDs for

[Video description begins] The Networking tab gets activated now. Its first section is NETWORK INTERFACE. It shows no available network interfaces. The next section is titled CONFIGURE VIRTUAL NETWORKS. It has fields-Virtual network, Subnet, Public IP, NIC network security group, Public inbound ports, and Accelerated networking. [Video description ends]

the utmost in performance, or Standard magnetic hard disk drives, HDD's. Now that would incur less cost, but of course, that comes with less performance. I'm going to leave it on Premium SSD. I can also attach data disks, whether they already exist or they want to Create a new one. Because what we're going to be creating here is essentially the operating system disk for the virtual machine. I'm okay with the defaults here of not having an additional data disk. So I'll click Next to move on to the Networking section. You need to deploy the virtual machine into an Azure Virtual Network, a VNet. Now, we can create a new Virtual network. Or I can choose from the drop down list if I've already created any.

[Video description begins] The value in Subnet is EastSubnet 1 with an IP address. [Video description ends]

And I have, I've got one called Eastvnet that I've deployed into a resource group called Rg1 which we also see listed here. So I'm going to leave that selection.

[Video description begins] The value in Public IP is ( new ) eastwindowsvm 1 - IP. [Video description ends]

A VNet is organized into one or more subnets. And down below, I can choose the appropriate subnet within that VNET that I actually want to deploy the virtual machine in. And always take note of the IP addressing because that reflects what addressing will be used, at least within that subnet for your Azure virtual machine.

[Video description begins] The default value in NIC network security group is Basic, in Public inbound ports is None and in Accelerated networking is Off. [Video description ends]

I can determine whether I want a public IP address available here.

[Video description begins] The last section is titled LOAD BALANCING. It has one field- Place this virtual machine behind an existing load balancing solution? It has 2 radio options -Yes and No. No is the default value. [Video description ends]

It's going to make a new one automatically

[Video description begins] The next tab- Management- gets activated. Its first section is titled MONITORING. It has 3 fields- Boot diagnostics, OS guest diagnostics, and Diagnostics storage account. [Video description ends]

that uses a name of the virtual machine with -ip at the end of it. Now, I want the public IP because I want to be able to connect to this virtual machine from outside of Azure from across the Internet.

[Video description begins] The default value in OS guest diagnostics is Off and the value in Diagnostics storage account field is eaststorageaccount 1. [Video description ends]

So we're not going to worry about changing any of the security settings or inbound ports because we'll be focusing on that in another demonstration. Much like we'll be talking about load balancing later on as well.

[Video description begins] The next section is titled IDENTITY and it has just 1 field, System assigned managed identity. Its default value is Off. [Video description ends]

So we will leave all the default selections for those. Then I'll click Next.

[Video description begins] The next section is titled AUTO-SHUTDOWN and it has just 1 field, Enable auto-shutdown. Its default value is Off. [Video description ends]

Boot diagnostics, which is used to capture things like boot up screens, is on by default and we've got a diagnostic storage account where that will be stored. I can also turn on operating system guest diagnostics if I want

[Video description begins] The last section is titled BACKUP, and it has 1 field, Enable backup with a default value of Off. [Video description ends]

metrics about the performance of that virtual machine gathered periodically.

[Video description begins] The tab Guest config gets activated. It has 2 sections- EXTENSIONS and CLOUD INIT. [Video description ends]

We can also assign a system assigned managed identity. You would use that if, for example, you had an app within this virtual machine that needed to talk to an Azure Key Vault to get credentials of some kind. We can also enable auto shutdown so that if we forget to turn off virtual machines at the end of the day, they'll turn off based on our configuration so we don't keep incurring costs.

[Video description begins] When he clicks the link Select an extension to install in the EXTENSIONS section, a new window titled New resource appears in the far-right side. It lists extensions with their logos. He closes this window. [Video description ends]

And we can determine whether we want to enable backup so I'm going to leave all of these default selections as they are. I'll click Next. I can also add extensions within the virtual machine.

[Video description begins] The tab Tags gets activated now. It has 3 drop-down fields- NAME, VALUE, and RESOURCE. He selects Project in the NAME field and Project A in the VALUE field. The value in RESOURCE field is 7 selected. When he has populated these fields, a new row with blank fields appears for adding new tags. [Video description ends]

If I choose Select an extension to install, we've got essentially agents that run within the virtual machine operating system for things like backup. Or for additional cloud security or script extensions if we want to run custom scripts, PowerShell Desired State, to maintain a baseline configuration, and so on. But I'm not going to do that, I'm going to click Next for tagging.

[Video description begins] The Review+create tab gets activated now. A progress bar at the top shows the review progress is going on. When it completes, a message says:Validation passed. PRODUCT DETAILS and TERMS shows the values he added in all the previous steps. [Video description ends]

And I will assign this to the ProjectA project,

[Video description begins] A window appears in the top-right corner showing the progress of the deployment process. The window has the text: Initializing deployment. [Video description ends]

I've already got that tag and value, otherwise I could add new ones. And then I'm going to click Review and create.

[Video description begins] After the window text changes to Submitting deployment, a screen titled Your deployment is underway appears. It has Cancel and Refresh buttons enabled on the top. [Video description ends]

So at this point, it's going to run a little validation based on my selections. And it now says validation passed and this is very important.

[Video description begins] The All resources window opens. [Video description ends]

We can see here what the US dollar cost per hour is approximated at here, so this is going to be important for determining the pricing for this. I'm okay with all of these settings. So I'm going to go ahead and click Create to build our Windows virtual machine. That pops us into this Your deployment is underway screen. And I could even click on All resources on the left, which I will do,

[Video description begins] Under the NAME column, 5 items for eastwindowsvm 1 are present. In the TYPE column, the item types are Virtual machine, Disk, Network interface, Public IP address, and Network security group. [Video description ends]

to see what's happening. Now, because a virtual machine really consists of a number of moving parts like an IP address, a network security group, a network interface, you'll notice that you could end up with more than just the virtual machine resource listed here when you're looking at the All resources view. And as I refresh the All resources view, notice I'm seeing more and more. I'm seeing the operating system disk for that virtual machine. And of course, I can also see the virtual machine itself. And as is the case with all Azure resources, if I were to click on the link for the name of that virtual machine, it opens up the properties blade where I could see all the items that I could configure about this virtual machine.



Linux Azure Virtual Machine Deployment
  - Use the Azure portal to create a new Linux virtual machine, to get started, in the upper left, I'm going to click Create a resource.
Now I can see the most popular virtual machine images here, including Ubuntu Server, which I'm going to use. Now I can see more options by clicking the Compute category on the left. And then on the right, I can click the See all link. Here I can filter, for example, by operating systems. So instead of selecting all operating systems, I could choose only the Linux variants shown here.

[Video description begins] In the Compute window, he clicks the drop-down arrow of Operating System field. He unchecks Select all and checks all the 6 check boxes in the Linux group. [Video description ends]

Now when I do that and then close the drop down list, the filter is effective. So in this case for example, I'm going to choose Ubuntu Server 18.04 LTS. When I click on it, it gives me a little brief synopsis about that.

[Video description begins] A new window title Ubuntu Server 18.04 LTS. It has a brief explanation about the server and a section titled Legal Terms. Its publisher and documentation links are also displayed. A Create button is placed at the window bottom. [Video description ends]

And I'm going to go ahead and click Create. Then I get details that need to be filled in.

[Video description begins] A Create a virtual machine window opens. The Basics tab is active now. [Video description ends]

So I've got the Subscription already filled in. I'm going to put this into an existing Resource group.

[Video description begins] He selects Rg1 in the Resource group field. [Video description ends]

And I'm going to call this, eastlinuxvm1. For the region, in this case I'll chose Canada East, because that's the closest proximity where I am working from. And I'm going to make sure that the Ubuntu image here is what I want, it is.

[Video description begins] The value in the Image field is Ubuntu Server 18.04 LTS. [Video description ends]

I'm going to leave the default virtual machine sizing. Otherwise, if I need to accommodate a busier workload, I might need more than 2 vcpus and 8 GB of memory. Notice that when I change size, it's not only increasing or scaling up vertically. But I can also scale down, that means choosing less horse power. So for example, maybe I'll choose a standard general purpose type of sizing. When I click Select, it now reflects the change, only 1 vcpu and 2 GB of memory.

[Video description begins] He selects Standard B1ms in the Select a VM size window. [Video description ends]

With Linux you can either use SSH public key authentication or standard password authentication, which I'll do here.

[Video description begins] He selects the Password radio option in the Authentication type field. [Video description ends]

With password authentication you've got to specify a username and confirm a password. But with SSH public key, you need to paste in the SSH public key for the specific username that you specify. And of course, you need to have the related private key in your possession on your station.

[Video description begins] When he selects the SSH public key radio option, the Password and Confirm password fields disappear, and are replaced by a field captioned SSH public key. [Video description ends]

So I'm going to go ahead and configure password authentication here. Once I've done that, as we scroll down further, we can control things like inbound port rules for network traffic.

[Video description begins] He leaves the default value of Off in the Login with Azure Active Directory field. [Video description ends]

However, I'm going to leave the defaults, I'm going to click Next.

[Video description begins] The Disks tab gets activated now. [Video description ends]

So here we have the option, just like with the Windows virtual machine, as to whether we want the better performing SSD, or the slower performing HDD, hard disk drive type of disk system. So I'm going to leave it on Premium SSD. I'm not going to attach any additional data disks. I'll just stick with the operating system disk here. When I go to Next, I can then place this within a virtual network in subnet, which I can either create newly or I can choose from the drop-down list.

[Video description begins] The Networking tab gets activated now. [Video description ends]

I'm going to leave this in my existing Vnet and Subnet. I wanted to create a Public IP, so I can reach into that virtual machine from across the Internet. I'm not going to change any of the other settings here related to inbound ports,

[Video description begins] The value in Virtual network field is EastVnet 1 and the value in Subnet field is EastSubnet 1 and an IP address. [Video description ends]

public configuration, or NIC security group options. I'm not going to change load balancing options. So in other words, I'm just going to click Next.

[Video description begins] The Management tab gets activated now. [Video description ends]

I'm going to leave the defaults for boot and OS guest diagnostics and auto-shutdown, I'll click Next.

[Video description begins] The Guest config tab gets activated now. [Video description ends]

Now, on the Guest config, I could click Select an extension to install, which is an agent that exist in the VM, just like it does for Windows. So for virus scanning, or for backup purposes, and so on.

[Video description begins] The New resource window pops up. [Video description ends]

But I'm not going to do that. I'll click Next for tagging.

[Video description begins] The Tags tab gets activated now. [Video description ends]

And here I could tie it to a project. Now I can tie it to an existing project, in this case ProjectA. That's a value, that's already been filled in, or I'm going to define something new here, Project B.

[Video description begins] He selects Project A in the VALUE field and changes A to B. [Video description ends]

Then I'm going to click Review + create. I'm going to check that all my options passed the final validation.

[Video description begins] A message- Validation passed- displays on the top of the window. [Video description ends]

Here we can see it has, listed here at the top. So I'm okay with this. I can see the pricing per hour on a US dollar basis, then I'll click Create. And that's going to give us a little deployment screen so we can see how far along the deployment is.

[Video description begins] The Initializing deployment window pops up in the top-right corner of the window. [Video description ends]

And of course, I can go to the All resources view on the left. And as I refresh it here, we'll see it has started to create the various resources that are required to run my Linux virtual machine.

[Video description begins] He clicks the All resources menu in the navigator and its window opens . He keeps clicking the Refresh button to update the list of resources displayed below. [Video description ends]

That would include things like an IP address, a network security group, and other items like the network interface, that it's going to create as we keep going. Here we can see the network interface, and even the virtual machine itself. So when I click on that virtual machine link to open up its properties blade, we can see from here we have all management options available in the portal. Including the ability to start, stop, and restart the virtual machine.

[Video description begins] He clicks eastlinuxvm 1 link under the NAME column and its window opens. [Video description ends]

Just like we have the option to do for a Windows virtual machine.

