                    AZ900 Microsoft Azure Cloud Fundamentals 2021
                    Course Notes Part 19


Common Data Privacy Frameworks
  - Data privacy has a big impact on organizational security policies especially as related to cloud computing. We have to consider the types of data that we need to safeguard using data privacy frameworks. Data such as Personally Identifiable Information otherwise called P-I-I or PII, Protected Health Information, PHI.
  - Data that resides within specific national boundaries might be subject to specific laws and regulations. But then we need to consider data that's being transmitted into a country from elsewhere, and also data being transmitted out of a country. With data privacy frameworks, the first consideration is Personally Identifiable Information or PII, which would include things like a person's phone number, their credit history, their mother's maiden name, their social security number, their credit card number, and so on.
So essentially, whatever can uniquely identify an individual in some way is called Personally Identifiable Information. Then on the right, we've got Protected Health Information which is more medically related. It would include things such as a patient's name, medical discharge dates, medical payments, past procedures, drugs that had been administered, and so on.

And so in relation to this type of information, we have to consider data privacy frameworks which outline how the data will be collected, how the data will be used. And whether or not the data will be shared with third parties. And often users must supply consent to some or all of these activities. And, there are also maybe laws and regulations that stipulate that this data collection use and sharing must be related directly to business practices. One example of data privacy is the General Data Protection Regulation

[Video description begins] Screen title: General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) [Video description ends]

otherwise called GDPR. This applies to European Union countries. It's all about data privacy within the European Union. But also it deals with data that will be exported outside of the European Union. Microsoft Azure is GDPR compliant. Now if an organization is found to be in breach of GDPR standards, then they could possibly be fined up to 4% of their annual global amount of profit or 20 million pounds.

So whichever one is greater. So there's definitely an incentive then for European Union organizations that will work with data to make sure that they adhere with the GDPR. Then we've got the National Institute of Standards and Technology, otherwise called NIST. This is a set of international standards, some of which are related to IT security, so the cybersecurity framework, which focuses on things like critical infrastructure.

Now critical infrastructure would be things like the power grid, water supplies, dams, that type of thing. And also, sensitive data related to that hosted by cloud providers. Now there are many different types of publications such as NIST Special Publication or SP 800-122. This specifically is the guide to protecting the confidentiality of Personally Identifiable Information or PII, P-I-I.

And it relates to things like strong access control and protection of data at rest. But in order for us to implement these types of security controls in accordance with these types of data privacy frameworks, we need to first identify things like Personally Identifiable Information within the organization and the systems that will process and store that type of information.

And then, we have to think about minimizing the collection and use of Personally Identifiable Information so that it only is used strictly for business-related purposes. There are many other bodies of frameworks related to data privacy, including the International Standards Organization, ISO. This is international, and one of the many standards is ISO/IEC 27017:2015. And this deals with cloud computing security controls, related to things like access control. So being authenticated and then authorized to use specific cloud services or resources.

Cloud tenant isolation or separation from one another. And also the secure removal of cloud tenant data so that there are no artifacts that can be retrieved by unauthorized parties after the fact. So with data privacy frameworks, the first thing we have to consider is which data privacy laws and regulations affect the organization.

And then, we need to think about our cloud solution, in this case, Azure, to ensure that we are adhering to those respective laws or regulations. We then need to incorporate data privacy into organizational security policies. And then within the organization, assign responsibility for compliance to laws and regulations. This normally comes in the form of an organizational role called a compliance officer.


The Azure Security Center
The Microsoft Azure Security Center gives you a central place where you can view security related items to be in a better position to enhance your security posture with the use of Azure Cloud Computing Services.
And so here in the Azure Portal, in the navigator on the left at the very bottom, I'm going to click Security Center. But notice everything is gray in the properties blade, and
that's because we need to make sure that we're using a security center plan, and it's not enabled by default. But we're going to go ahead and start a trial, a 30 day free trial to be specific, so if I scroll down here on the far right, I can click Start trial.

[Video description begins] The Start trial button is located at the bottom of the page. [Video description ends]

So I'm going to go ahead and do that.

[Video description begins] A message box pops up in the right corner and it says:Trial started. [Video description ends]

And one of the things that it wants to do is install agents within my virtual machines in my Azure subscription, so it knows how secure they are or are not.

[Video description begins] A section titled Install agents automatically, displays. It has a table with the type of subscriptions installed, Pay-As-You-Go, in this case. It also has a button labelled Install agents. [Video description ends]

So I've got my subscription selected here, I'm going to go ahead and click Install agents. Once that's been done, we can see things become available in the properties blade. And I'm still in the Overview area where we can get a great list of overall suggestions related to security, or rather any security shortcomings related to our Azure environment.

[Video description begins] All the menu items in the navigator become enabled now. A Policy & compliance section displays on the right. It shows the Least compliant regulatory standards, Secure score, resource security hygiene, and Subscription coverage. [Video description ends]

So we can see we've got an overall secure score here of 348 out of 480. Well, that's not 480 out of 480, so let me go ahead and click on that to pull up some details related to that.

[Video description begins] The Secure Score Dashboard displays. It shows a section titled Secure score by category. Here, 4 categories are covered- Compute & apps, Data & storage, Networking, and Identity & access. Progress bars below each category shows the score. A table displays below the scores, and it contains 2 columns titled SUBSCRIPTION and SECURE SCORE. 1 subscription, Pay-As-You-Go, displays in the table. A hyperlink, View recommendations, is present next to this subscription. [Video description ends]

So down below, we can see our subscription, and we can see that we have a View recommendations link up above. You can also click on specific categories like Compute & apps versus Identity & access. Down below, I'm just going to click on View recommendations, so we can see all of them.

[Video description begins] The Recommendations page displays. All 9 resources in different categories display along with their health monitoring score, marked by different colors for different severity levels- red for high severity; orange for medium severity; and blue for low severity. Below this, all recommendations display in a table format with columns titled RECOMMENDATION, SECURE SCORE, and FAILED RESOURCES. [Video description ends]

Well, red naturally might be a problem, so let's see. We've got a problem here with our subscription, it says that we need to enable MFA multi-factor authentication. For accounts that have owner permissions on our subscription, apparently, that's not been done. That's a great point actually. Because with multi-factor authentication, instead of having knowledge of the username and password with overall access to our subscription.

We could add another factor such as requiring a smartphone that has a constantly changing numeric value, that is only good for a few seconds. So, when we have to authenticate, we'd have to specify the numeric code which is only good for a short period of time, in addition to having knowledge of the username and the password. That's a good way to secure our accounts through multi-factor authentication.

And we'll focus more on that in another demo where we focus on identity and access management. It says here we should also enable network security groups on subnets. So remember, you can click on each of these to get more further detail about what that description is for that recommendation.

[Video description begins] He clicks one of the recommendations, Enable Network Security Groups Groups on Subnets, and its page opens. It contains the number of Unhealthy resources and Healthy resources, and a Learn more hyperlink. Remediation steps also display. The page contains tabs- Unhealthy resources, Healthy resources, and Unscanned resources. Unhealthy resources tab is active now and it shows one unhealthy resource- Subnet1. [Video description ends]

So it'll go ahead and tell us the culprit, so to speak here, which in this case, happens to be Subnet1.

[Video description begins] The Subnet1 page opens. It contains fields such as Address range, Available addresses, Network security group, and Route table. [Video description ends]

And when I actually click on that, I can actually see details related to that, such as, the network security group, which is set to none for that specific subnet. So we can drill down and actually solve problems. We can also see here that we don't have endpoint protection installed on virtual machines, for things like anti-malware at least, in this case, for one of two virtual machines.

[Video description begins] He returns to the Recommendations page and hovers over the next recommendation. [Video description ends]

And if I click on that to drill down, we can see here the severity level is high and the culprit here apparently is a virtual machine called eastwindowsvm1.

[Video description begins] The Endpoint Protection not installed on Azure VMs page opens. It contains a table with columns titled VIRTUAL MACHINE, STATE, and SEVERITY. One VM is listed. Its name is eastwindowsvm1 and its state is open and severity is high. The following 2 links display at the top of the page: Filter and Install on 1 VMs. [Video description ends]

So, notice that we've got a link here to install on 1 VM, we can just click it and choose to install Microsoft anti-malware, we can go through and get that done.

[Video description begins] The Select Endpoint Protection page opens. One software, Microsoft Antimalware, displays here. [Video description ends]

[Video description begins] The Microsoft Antimalwareinstallation page displays. [Video description ends]

So not only does it point out any security deficiencies but it gives us a very convenient and easy way to solve the problem. Now, of course, if you have that problem on hundreds of virtual machines, that's probably not the best way to deal with it, however, it does work.

Now here, we've got Install on 1 VMs because that is what happens to be selected here. So if we select a bunch of them, for example, hundreds of them, then we can have the ability to install that endpoint protection agent on hundreds of VMs at once, so it's very convenient. 

[Video description begins] He returns to The Endpoint Protection not installed on Azure VMs page and unchecks the eastwindowsvm1 option. [Video description ends]

As we go further down the list in the Azure Security Center, we can also see it suggests that we don't have disk encryption applied on virtual machines for protection of data at rest, so we can go ahead and do that. So the security center that is designed to give us details on any security shortcomings in our Azure environment, along with the convenient way to address those concerns.


Azure Service Trust Portal
  - The Microsoft Azure Service Trust Portal allows us to track compliance, to run audit reports on that compliance. And also to focus on data protection in line with laws and regulations. The Azure Service Trust Portal allows us to work with the Compliance Manager. This allows us to be compliant with different data protection regulations including HIPAA, GDPR, ISO 27001, to name just a few.

We can also track our compliance with specific rules that need to be followed, and we can also even assign compliance responsibility. In the Azure Service Trust Portal, another aspect is auditing. Where we can run audit reports for compliance with standards related to ISO, PCI DSS for cardholder data protection, FedRAMP, SOC, otherwise called SOC.

So for example, SOC3 allows organizations to adhere to rules for internal controls within an organization for things like business processes and the integrity of those business processes. Finally, the Azure Service Trust Portal also deals with data protection, where documentation is made available. There is also mappings made between data privacy frameworks, a variety of them, to the Azure security controls will allow organizations to be compliant in those specific regards. There are also frequently asked question documents and white papers that are available for Azure IT technicians.


Block Public SSH and RDP Traffic
When you deploy Linux and Windows virtual machines into Azure, you probably want to remotely manage them from on-premises. And so you might use SSH to get into Linux hosts or the remote desktop protocol client to get into Windows hosts. The problem is we don't want that type of accessibility through a public IP address on each VM.

Instead ideally, we would use a point to site VPN connection from our administration on-premises to Azure, and then SSH or RDP to the private IP address of those VMs. So here in the Azure Portal, why don't we start by going into the Virtual machines view on the left?

[Video description begins] The Microsoft Azure portal home page displays in a browser window. The host clicks Virtual machines in the navigator pane. Its page opens on the right. It has buttons titled Add reservations, Edit columns, Assign tags, Start, Stop, Delete, and Services. The available Subscriptions, namely, Pay-As-You-Go, displays below the buttons. By default, Filter fields are set to All resource groups, all types, All locations, all tags, and No grouping. A table with columns titled NAME, TYPE, STATUS, RESOURCE GROUPS, LOCATION, MAINTENANCE, SUBSCRIPTION, and TAGS, displays below. The table displays 2 items- eastlinuxvm1 and eastwindowsvm1. [Video description ends]

Let's start with our eastlinuxvm1 virtual machine that's running Linux.

[Video description begins] The eastlinuxvm1 page opens. It shows the virtual machine settings such as Resource group set to Rg1, Status set to Running, and Location set to Canada East. [Video description ends]

Now, the first thing I notice is it does have a public IP address. Well, if that's only for the purpose of allowing inbound administration, that's a problem. So what we're going to do is click on Networking over on the left as well.

[Video description begins] He clicks Networking in the navigator. Its page opens. The Effective security rules and Topology hyperlinks display here. The Public IP is present as a hyperlink below Effective security rules. [Video description ends]

And I can see here that if we look at the effective security rules, I'll click on Effective security rules. And the virtual machine has to be running for effective rules to display here. We'll then see that we've got access that would be allowed here into the virtual machine over a specific port.

[Video description begins] After the security rules complete the loading process, eastlinuxvm1 -Effective security rules page opens. Associated NSGs field has the value NSG1 (Subnet). 2 tabs- eastlinuxvm1 and NSG1 display below. eastlinuxvm1 is open now. The text- Inbound rules- display on the top. A table with columns such as NAMES PRIORITY, SOURCE, SOURCE PORTS and DESTINATION, displays. [Video description ends]

So for example, we've got a port 22 rule from any source that's allowed to get to any destination on TCP port 22, which is SSH. However, do we really want to allow that coming in? The answer is no. And at the same time, we really don't need a public IP address if that's the sole purpose of it for this Linux virtual machine.

So let's clean this up a little bit. We're going to go ahead and close out some of these things. I'm going to go back to Networking, where notice we've got the public IP listed here for this Linux virtual machine.

[Video description begins] He returns to the Networking page and clicks the link under the Public IP field . A page titled pubIP1 opens. The page has buttons titled Associate, Dissociate, Move, Delete, and Refresh. [Video description ends]

And when I click the link, it takes me into that because it's a separate Azure resource, the public IP. I'm going to click Dissociate. Now I'm going to do that so

[Video description begins] When he clicks Dissociate, a confirmation window pops up and he clicks Yes in it. [Video description ends]

that it's not associated any longer with the Linux virtual machine.

[Video description begins] A window with the text: Saving network interface- pops up in the top-right corner of the page. [Video description ends]

And if this public IP address resource isn't needed for anything else, I can even go ahead and delete the resource. It's always a good idea to delete Azure resources that you are certain you no longer need. Because then you're not incurring any additional charges, plus it just makes management of your Azure resources a little bit more streamlined.

[Video description begins] A window with the text: Saved network interface- displays. [Video description ends]

Now, at the same time, I'm going to close out of that and go back to the Networking part of the properties blade for my Linux virtual machine. Because I'm interested in looking at the network security groups here. So I've got a couple of network security groups.

Remember, if we click on Effective security rules, if the VM's running, we'll see all effective security rules that apply to this particular virtual machine at this point in time. And here, I've got a network security group for the VM itself and then another one for a subnet. And if I click on these links, notice I can see where the rules comes from. And so the Port_22 item is from the eastlinuxvm1-nsg, or network security group. I'm going to go ahead and click on that so we can look at the inbound rules.

[Video description begins] The eastlinuxvm1 -nsg page opens and he clicks the Inbound security rules menu in the Settings menu group in the navigator. On the right, the rules display in a table containing columns titled PRIORITY, NAME, PORT, PROTOCOL, SOURCE, DESTINATION, and ACTION. 4 rules display in the table. [Video description ends]

Here is the Port_22 rule, so I'm going to go ahead and select that and delete the rule, why?

[Video description begins] The Port_ 22 pane displays on the extreme right. It has 4 buttons titled Save, Discard, Basic, and Delete. When he clicks Delete, a confirmation window displays and he clicks Yes in it. [Video description ends]

Because we don't need it. What we're going to be doing, as we've seen in another demo, is connecting our on-premises station through a VPN to Azure, that's called a point to site VPN. After which, we can then connect to the private IP of the virtual machine.

[Video description begins] He clicks Overview in the navigator. [Video description ends]

So let's just go ahead and close out of this network security group, we can see the rule's been removed. And back here, let's just close the network interface actually. We've got all kinds of levels of resources we're into. Now let's go back to the overview for the VM itself. So what we're going to be interested in then is noting that we no longer have a public IP address. But if I go ahead and click on Networking on the left, we can see the private IP for this host.

[Video description begins] He highlights the value in the Private IP field. [Video description ends]

And so the private IP then is going to go ahead and allow us to make a connection to that host once we have VPNed into the network environment. And just bear in mind that the default rule here, AllowVnetInbound will allow connectivity for resources on the VNET to resources in that same VNET, like our Linux virtual machine.

[Video description begins] He hovers over the AllowVnetInBound port rule in the displayed table. [Video description ends]

So we could go ahead and follow this practice and apply it to all the virtual machines that we don't want publicly accessible for remote management purposes.

Azure Government Services

[Video description begins] Topic title: Azure Government Services. Your host for this session is Dan Lachance. [Video description ends]

Cloud computing with Azure presents a lot of interesting opportunities, not only for private sector enterprises, but also for the US government.

[Video description begins] Screen title: Azure Government Services. [Video description ends]

So Azure Government Services provides specific Azure services for US government agencies, such as the Department of Defense or DoD. So federal agencies, state agencies, and even municipal agencies. With Azure Government Services, one consideration is a hybrid cloud, where there are some government agency data centers, that can be extended into the Azure cloud.

So that some services and data reside in the cloud and are replicated from on premises, either for safe keeping or for high availability. Also Azure Government Services uses dedicated data centers located throughout the United States, although those locations are not disclosed. There are many different types of connected devices that can be related to government use of the Azure government cloud. Such as traffic control systems, heating, ventilation and air conditioning for government agency facilities.

Also, entire smart cities and military sites. With Azure Government Services, we need to think about differences between how we would configure IT systems and services on premises versus the cloud. Because while there are a lot of similarities, it's not done in exactly the same manner. One reason for this is shared responsibility, because when we use cloud computing, depending on exactly what we're deploying into the cloud, such as an infrastructure as a service virtual machine.

Means that some of the underlying responsibility such as for the hypervisor that hosts our virtual machine would be the responsibility of Microsoft in the Azure cloud. But the maintenance and the application of updates and configuration of the operating system in that virtual machine, in this case, would be the responsibility of us, the cloud consumer.

Things like DNS name resolution, bear in mind, set as a default Azure-provided DNS. Which means that if we want to use our own DNS servers, that has to be a conscious decision, and that's a configuration we'd have to make.

Also, virtual network IP addresses that are available. Bear in mind that when you might be configuring a government agency network on premises and assigning IP address ranges. You will have more IP addresses available for your use than you might in the Azure cloud, because Azure reserves IP addresses. As seen here, when we are adding a subnet to a Microsoft Azure virtual network, notice that there are five Azure reserved addresses that are allocated.

[Video description begins] Screen title: Azure Virtual Networking. A screenshot of the Add subnet dialog box displays. It contains 2 fields- Name and Address range. Subnet4 displays in the Name field and 10.1.0.0/24 displays in the Address range field. Below this field is the text- 10.1.0.0-10.1.0.255 (251 + 5 Azure reserved addresses). [Video description ends]

So that means within your IP address range for the subnet, that's five IP addresses that you cannot use. And so that's an important consideration. Azure Government Secret is a part of the Azure government cloud that adheres to Department of Defense Impact Level 5. Which deals with controlled yet unclassified information, otherwise called CUI. And it's also compliant with the use of National Security Systems or NSS.

So this is any type of computing system that processes data that meets a certain level of security and is deemed acceptable for use in this context for US government use. Also, Azure Government Secret uses dedicated infrastructure so that we've got a physical separation between cloud tenants. And connectivity is through the Non-classified Internet Protocol Router Network, otherwise called NIPRNet. NIPRNet is a private network that's used for the sharing of information that's considered unclassified for Azure government use.

Azure Germany Services

[Video description begins] Topic title: Azure Germany Services. Your host for this session is Dan Lachance. [Video description ends]

Azure Germany services, as the name implies, relates to the use of Azure cloud services in the German environment. This means that workloads need to run in German data centers. And the data also needs to reside in German data centers. This means that we need to have appointed a German data trustee that is responsible for the oversight of these data centers in Germany.

And this is done specifically by T-Systems International. There are only two Azure German regions. Now, replication occurs between these regions for high availability like it would between any other regions around the world for Azure. The two regions are Germany Central and Germany Northeast.

When you use Azure Germany services, you'll notice that some of the DNS suffixes are different than what you might be used to when you use Azure outside of Germany. So for example, when we're using Azure SQL we would have a DNS suffix by default that ends in .database.cloudapi.de. Whereas outside of Germany, normally that SQL suffix for DNS would be .database.windows.net. And you'll see some of those changes with a variety of different Azure services that use DNS suffixes.

In Azure Germany services, ExpressRoute circuits are supported, but only for Azure not for Office 365. ExpressRoute circuits use a local point of presence so that organizations, or in some cases government agencies, can have a dedicated network circuit or link straight from their data center directly into the Azure cloud without traversing the Internet.

Azure Active Directory is supported with Azure Germany services, however, you can't use a standard Microsoft account sign-in for Azure. Where that will work outside of Azure Germany, it does not work with Azure Germany services.

View Azure PCI DSS Compliance

[Video description begins] Topic title: View Azure PCI DSS Compliance. Your host for this session is Dan Lachance. [Video description ends]

PCI DSS is a security standard that applies to organizations that deal with cardholder data, things like credit cards and debit cards. And it's a series of security controls that should be put in place to ensure the safeguarding of that type of data. And in Azure, we have a way to view our compliance based on our current configuration of our Azure resources. While it's not complete and doesn't give us a 100% assurance that we are complying, it certainly a very good starting point. So to get to this, the first thing I'll do here in the Azure Portal is go to the Security Center down at the bottom of the left-hand navigator.

[Video description begins] The Microsoft Azure portal homepage displays. The Azure services page is open now. [Video description ends]

[Video description begins] The Security Center -Overview page opens. It has 2 main sections titled Policy & compliance and Resource security hygiene. [Video description ends]

And then in the properties blade for the Security Center, there's something you'll see under policy and compliance called Regulatory compliance which is currently a preview feature. So I'm going to go ahead and click on it. Now over on the right, I can see we've got number of different standards bodies here such as ISO 27001, SOC TSP, and

[Video description begins] A Download report hyperlink displays on the top of the page. A donut chart titled Regulatory compliance assessment displays below. It shows the number of failed, passed, and skipped assessments, denoted by colors- red, green, and grey, respectively. On the right, the Regulatory standards compliance status report displays. It shows assessment status for 4 services- Azure CIS1.0.0, PCI DSS3.2, ISO27001, and SOC TSP. The page also shows 4 tabs by the same name as the services, plus a tab titled All. [Video description ends]

of course, what we're looking for PCI DSS. It says that out of 30 past controls, we've got 30. However, that doesn't mean we are 100% compliant with what we should be in a PCI DSS context if we're dealing with cardholder data. So I'm going to click the link down below for PCI DSS 3.2. This gives me a bit more detail. I'm going to choose the checkbox for expand all compliance controls.

Because as you see, just because we have a green bar next to something. In this case, install and maintain a firewall configuration to protect cardholder data that comes straight from PCI DSS. Notice that we've got some compliance green bars here but others, not necessarily. So we have to take a look at those and

[Video description begins] A multi-level list of compliance controls displays. It has a total of 4 items- 3 of which have a green bar before them, and 1 has a grey bar. [Video description ends]

address them, so we can expand upon them to read more details about what we should be doing to be fully compliant. And as we go further down through this list, well actually why don't we do this. How about I remove the check mark for expanding all compliance controls.

There's no question that the grayed out items mean that we are missing some things that we should be doing to secure cardholder data.

[Video description begins] The multi-level list collapses and a single, numbered list of compliance controls displays. Some of them have a green bar before them, and some have grey. A down arrow is present next to all controls. [Video description ends]

And if I expand them, in this case for the regular use and updating of antivirus programs. Well, it says that we should be deploying that solution, and we are not,

[Video description begins] When he clicks the down arrow of one of the compliance control, it expands downwards to reveal recommended steps. [Video description ends]

on all of our virtual machines. However, again, if we've got something like, assign a unique ID to each person with computer access, if we expand that, and take a look at these subordinate items. While some of them do have green bars, again some do not, there are gray bars. So we need to read those and make the appropriate changes if we are seeking full compliance, in this case, with PCI DSS.

Azure Service Level Agreements

[Video description begins] Topic title: Azure Service Level Agreements. Your host for this session is Dan Lachance. [Video description ends]

Service Level Agreements or SLAs are contractual documents between a service provider and the service consumer. In this context, the service provider is Microsoft Azure, and in this context, the service consumer would be you. You are the Azure customer. So the service level agreement is important because it stipulates what we can expect for performance and uptime from a given Azure service.

So in other words, there's an SLA for each different Azure service. And it's important that we take a look at that to know what we can expect. Especially if we're burdened with meeting specific compliance guidelines, perhaps by certain industry standards. And we want to make sure that we comply with those through the use of Azure Cloud Computing Services.

[Video description begins] The Microsoft Azure home page displays in a browser window. The URL in the address bar is: https://azure.microsoft.com/en-ca/support/legal/sla. The re are some tabs on the page such as Overview, Solutions, Products, Documentation, Pricing, and Training. The page titles says: Service Level Agreements. [Video description ends]

So here, I've gone to the Microsoft Azure Service Level Agreements page. You can use your favorite search engine to search this up and you'll find it in a hurry. And if I scroll down, I can see that I've got a list of all kinds of different products and categories that I can do the SLAs for. So for example, let's say we start with the Compute category and I want to look at the SLA for Virtual Machines.

[Video description begins] He scrolls down to reach the products sections. On the left, all the products are listed and a search field is present at the top. He selects Compute from the product list and its page opens on the right. It has hyperlinks such as Virtual Machines, Azure Kubernetes Service, Service Fabric, and Batch. [Video description ends]

[Video description begins] A page titled- SLA for Virtual Machines- displays. It has a bulleted list of information and expandable links such as Introduction and General Terms. [Video description ends]

So here we see the service level agreement for virtual machines and whether it's deployed across two or more availability zones for high availability. And we can see here connectivity to at least one of them, 99.99% of the time. So as we go further down through a Service Level Agreement document, you'll see that it's broken into an Introduction section.

Then we've got a General Terms, so the terms that are used throughout the SLA document. And then as we go further down, we can see the SLA details for this specific service, in this case, virtual machines. And we can also determine what kind of, in this case, a service credit we might receive if we've got less than a specific amount of service uptime that is promised through the SLA.

Now that's just for virtual machines, let's say, we were to go and look at Storage. So I'm interested in looking at standard storage with storage accounts. So again, we can see that we've got 99.99% uptime, and the ability to process storage requests. And here it also even mentions something specific to this class of Azure resource, or storage, in this case, for Cool Access Tiers.

And again, we can view the introductory information about this SLA, in this case, for Azure storage, just as before, we can see General Terms. A lot of that would be similar across SLAs but they won't always be exactly the same naturally due to the nature of the different types of cloud services. And then we can see the SLA details. So for example, here, we've got references to Blob Storage Accounts, Hot Access Tier, Cool Access Tier.

And as we go further down again, we can see the processing time and the types of transactions that we can expect to get in terms of performance. And then if that is not met, then we can see the service credits related to the sub par performance that we might experience. Hopefully, you will never experience it. So, it's very important then that we keep abreast of all of these service level agreements and any changes to them for the Azure services that we are using.

Azure Preview Features and General Availability

[Video description begins] Topic title: Azure Preview Features and General Availability. Your host for this session is Dan Lachance. [Video description ends]

Azure preview features are just that. They're new features that Microsoft is making available for testing purposes in the Azure environment because with Microsoft Azure there is a constant process for improvement of available cloud services. However, we don't want to use preview features for mission critical workloads.

Azure preview features can be turned on or off for the specific services that you might be interested in using the preview feature for. But the thing to bear in mind is that Azure preview features are excluded from Azure service level agreements or SLAs. So where the SLA might guarantee up time or response time, that would not apply if you are using an Azure preview feature. You can get notifications of Azure preview features that show up in the portal as pictured here.

[Video description begins] A screenshot of Azure Notifications page displays. The bell icon in the title bar is selected. There are 2 hyperlinks on the page, namely More events in the activity log and Dismiss all. A list of latest updates such as Recent, Resource groups, Marketplace, and Templates, displays below. [Video description ends]

When you look at the Notification icon, the alarm bell icon, you'll see notifications for the appropriate items that have new preview features. Here we can see preview listed next to Templates and the Quickstart Center. After Azure preview features have gone through the appropriate testing and feedback from customers has been brought into the final version of the product, the final version of that product or feature means it is now available generally. That's called general availability, often simply notated in documentation as GA.

[Video description begins] Screen title: Azure General Availability, abbreviated to: GA. [Video description ends]

So GA features and APIs then are covered by Azure service level agreements because its an actual feature that is supported now by Microsoft. It's no longer in the preview phase. Now if you're a developer, and you've taken advantage of some preview features, the reality is that sometimes features that were available in preview at the development level are removed once the feature or product goes to general availability.

And so any preview code that might have worked during the preview phase may no longer work in the general availability phase. And so you might need to make a few code changes to adhere to that fact.
