                    AZ900 Microsoft Azure Cloud Fundamentals 2021
                    Course Notes Part 30


Deploy an HTML Azure App Service
  - In the Azure portal, I'm going to start in the upper left by clicking Create a resource and then under the Web category choose Web App
  - I'm going to call this web app webapptest172
    - Notice it that's going to be part of the url, because it's going to add .azurewebsites.net as a DNS domain name suffix
    - Although I can configure custom DNS domain names if I wish.
  - Stick with that one, and put this in an existing resource group
    - Although you could build a brand new resource group into which you deploy all of the items that will be related to this web application
  - We can choose either Windows or Linux for the backend operating system hosting my application, my web app
    - Leave it as just code, as opposed to using a darker image to run the app.
    - Then deal with the service plan. And I'm going to click on Service plan and we're going to create a new one.
    - Call this testwebapp172_ or dash rather, serviceplan for example
  - The next thing to do is specify the location, and notice that in this service plan for the app
    - This is where I can specify the pricing tier or the sizing for the underlying virtual machine or machines that will support my app.
  - So choose the Dev / Test category, choose this F1 pricing tier, where there is 1 gigabyte of memory and click Apply then click OK
  - We can now see that that app service plan is now tied to this web application, go ahead and click Create to build the web app
    - After a moment, over on the left, go to App Services, see that my application now exists and that its status is listed as Running.
  - Otherwise I can keep clicking Refresh up at the top until I see it. Of course, I can always look up my alerts until I see that the deployment succeeded for this specific resource.
  - So I'm going to go ahead and click on my web app, and in the overview panel, what I'm interested in to start with is the URL.
So notice the URL here is comprised of the name of the resource with .azurewebsites.net which we saw while we were creating it. I'm going to go ahead and copy that.
And we're going to open up that website in a new web browser window. And this is what I can expect to see by default, an Azure page that says, Your App Service app is up and running.
And if I go back to the Azure portal, indeed, we can see that is the URL, and indeed everything is working. Now, if I scroll down, we also have a lot of configuration settings for our web applications. So if I go to Application settings, we can determine the language support in the back end. For example, the version of PHP, which can matter, depending on what kind of functionality you're writing into your PHP scripts.
Also, we can see the .NET Framework version, Python and Java, if we're going to be using those. So we have a number of options here that we can configure for our specific application. As I go further down on the application settings page, I can also see the default documents. So these are the documents that will be pulled up when the URL is connected to.
Such as Default.htm or, what we're going to be interested in in a moment, index.php. As I scroll further and further down, we can also specify custom domain names. Now, in this particular case, we'd have to upgrade the app service plan type in order to do that, but we can do it.
So what I'm going to do then is I'm going to take an existing on-premises PHP file I've created. And we're going to upload it here to our web app and make sure that it takes effect. So here's my sample PHP file on-premises. It really just comes back and says, sample PHP page hosted in Azure. And sets the title in the browser to My Azure Web App.
What I want to do is save this file locally on-premises and then upload it to the site, and I'm going to do that through FTP. So back here in the portal, I'm still looking at the properties blade for my web application. I'm going to scroll back up and choose Overview. And then from here, I can see I've got the FTP hostname, which is important, but what I want to do is get the publishing profile.
This is going to provide me with the credentials, not just the FTP username, but also the FTP password. So I'm going to go ahead and download the publishing profile. Once that's been downloaded, I'm going to go ahead and click to open it up.
What I'm interested in primarily is the username here listed and also the user password for FTP.
I've downloaded and installed the free FileZilla FTP GUI tool. So the first thing you need here is the host.
So back here in the portal, I'm on the Overview part of the Properties blade. So I'm going to go ahead and copy the FTP hostname and paste that into FileZilla.
Next, I'm going to go to the publishing profile I downloaded and copy the FTP username and password and then paste them into the appropriate fields here in FileZilla. And once I've done that, I'll then click, Quickconnect. And after a moment, we can see on the right, under the Remote site section, we have access to our web application, but in the underlying file system through FTP. So if I go to wwwroot, the root of the website, we've got the default Azure placed hostingstart.html file.
But what I want to put there is my index.php. So that is available on my local machine under samplefiles, which I'll choose on the left.
    - There's index.php, so I'm just going to drag that over and drop it so that it shows up into the wwwroot folder for my site.
    - Here in a browser, we've still got the URL for my site, but if the page is refreshed 
    - We should be now seeing that it's picking up the Sample PHP page that was uploaded.
  - You can use other tools to manage the content and the code for your website, such as Visual Studio
    - You might run that on-premises, so that you can work with your code and then push it up into the cloud into your Azure web application.


Azure Functions
  - Azure Functions fall under the classification of serverless computing
    - These allow developers in the cloud to create and run code
    - So the fees that are charged are based only on when that code is actually running
    - With Azure Functions, developers don't have to worry about deploying virtual machines and virtual networks
    - And taking care of all of that underlying infrastructure
    - Because this is a managed service, developers can focus more on the code and the applications that they need to think about and work on
    - Instead worrying about the supporting infrastructure.
  - This is really for software developers and as a software developer, you would be interested in knowing whether or not you can use the language of your choosing
    - The language that you're familiar with, with Azure Functions
    - There are a wide variety of languages that can be used, including PHP, Java, Node.js, C#, and F#
    - What happens is we have to think about what will trigger the functions to execute.
  - There are plenty of different types of triggers that can be defined for an Azure Function, such as a CosmosDBTrigger
    - This means that when data is either modified or placed into a Cosmos DB database, then the code can be triggered at that point in time
    - If users upload content to a storage account container, then the BlobTrigger would kick in, and we could have it execute an Azure Function of our choosing.
  - You might do that to further organize uploaded files, or to do something specific to them
    - Such as maybe adding a watermark to a video image that's uploaded or to a graphic file image
    - The HTTPTrigger, as the name implies, gets triggered based on a specific type of HTTP request
    - When that is triggered, we can define which Azure Function runs
    - There's also a QueueTrigger, which is based on messages coming into an Azure storage queue that developers could query
    - When that occurs, an Azure Function could run.
  - Azure Functions, because we're talking about development here, can be defined in a number of different places, such as through the Azure portal
    - Or you might use a tool that you're familiar with, such as Visual Studio
    - You might use the Azure CLI to work with functions
    - Of course, you might use specific language tools related to languages such as Java and Python.


Azure App Event Grid
  - The purpose of Event Grid is it lets developers configure certain triggers by events such as making a change to an Azure resource. That can then connect to some kind of endpoint or hook into some other aspect of an application for notifications. And in our particular case, we're simply going to set it up such that when a change is written to an Azure virtual machine, we want to be notified via email.
  - The first thing we'll do here, to get started is we will create a Logic App. Here in the Azure portal, I'm going to click Create a resource over on the left, and I'm going to type in the word logic and then from the results, I'll choose Logic App.
[Video description begins] He clicks Create a resource in the navigation pane, and types logic in the Search field. He selects Logic App from the drop-down results. A Logic App window displays. It has a brief explanation about logic apps and a Create button. [Video description ends]

Then I'm going to go ahead and click on Create so we can get to the point where we start configuring this resource. So after specifying a name, here I'm going to call it vmchange_logicapp, and in this case, I'm going to put it into an existing resource group and I've specified the location. After having done that I'm simply going to click on Create.

[Video description begins] The Logic App window displays. He types vmchange_ logicapp in the Name field. He leaves the default value of Pay-As-You-Go in the Subscription field. He leaves the default option- Use existing- in the Resource group field, and selects Rg1 in the field below. He selects Canada east in the Location field, and leaves the default value Off in the Log Analytics field. [Video description ends]

And after a moment, if I go to my All Resources view and if I type in logic, then we could see our Logic App listed.

[Video description begins] He clicks All resources in the navigation pane and types logic in the Name field on the right. vmchange_ logicappdisplays in the list below. He clicks it and its properties page displays. [Video description ends]

If I click on it, it starts the Logic App's designer where we can get some help on how to work with this and we can also choose from some basic templates.

[Video description begins] The Logic Apps Designer window opens. Basic templates are listed there. [Video description ends]

So like when a message is received in a queue, or when an http request is received, and so on. And if I scroll down a little bit beyond all that, I can choose to build a blank Logic App which I'm going to do here.

[Video description begins] He scrolls down and clicks the tile with a large plus symbol and caption Blank Logic App. A new page opens It has buttons, Save, Discard, Run, Designer, Code View, Templates, Connections, and Help. A Search field is also present to search connections and triggers. Below are 6 tabs- For You, All, Built-ins, Connections, Enterprise, and Custom. The For You tab is active now and there are no recent connections to show. [Video description ends]

And I'm going to search for event grid.

[Video description begins] He types event grid in the Search field and clicks the All tab. Many event grids with their logos display below. [Video description ends]

So I'm going to choose Azure Event Grid. And then when a resource event occurs for Azure Event Grid.

[Video description begins] He clicks the Azure Event Grid and a new tile appears. It has a field, Tenant, with the text Default Directory written in it. There is a Sign in button below the field. [Video description ends]

And then I'm going to click Sign in to authenticate to my Azure subscription And then I'm asked to confirm that I want to allow the provisioning to provide access to Azure Event Grid.

[Video description begins] A confirmation dialog box appears. He clicks Allow access. [Video description ends]

And I'm going to choose Allow Access. And then I have to fill in this detail related to the subscription and also the resource type that I'm interested in in this particular case. So I'm going to choose Microsoft.Resources.ResourceGroups for the resource type and I'm going to set the resource name to a resource group that I already have Rg1 that I know virtual machines have been deployed into. And then I'm going to go ahead and save this Logic App.

[Video description begins] A new tile appears titled When a resource event occurs. He selects Pay-As-You-Go in the Subscription field. [Video description ends]

[Video description begins] He clicks the Save button in the Logic Apps Designer window. [Video description ends]

Now, I'm going to go back into the Logic app designer here in my Logic app.

[Video description begins] In the vmchange_ logicapp window, he clicks Logic app designer in the Development Tools group in the navigation pane. [Video description ends]

And underneath, when a resource event occurs, I'm going to click New step, and then I'm going to choose Built-in and I need some kind of conditional way to determine what's going to happen next. But to do that I'm going to scroll down and choose Condition. That's a control.

[Video description begins] A Choose an action window opens. He selects the Built-ins tab. [Video description ends]

[Video description begins] He scrolls down to the section with 2 tabs- Triggers and Actions. All the actions are listed in the Action tab and he selects Condition. [Video description ends]

And I'm going to specify data.operationName is equal to and what we're looking for is any right activity for our Azure virtual machines related to the resource group.

[Video description begins] A tile titled Condition opens. It has boxes with text and drop-down arrows. At the top is a box with text And. It branches down into 2- one a check box with 3 boxes captioned data.operationName, is equal to, and Microsoft Compute. The second branch has text +Add and a drop-down arrow. [Video description ends]

So that's my condition. Now, down below, for true, and also, of course, if that turns out to be true versus false, we can add an action. So if it's true, if a change has been made to write to a virtual machine, I'm going to click Add an action.

[Video description begins] Below the tile, are 2 more tiles titled if true and if false. He clicks Add an action in the if true tile, and a Choose an action box window appears again. [Video description ends]

And from here I can choose what it is exactly that I want to do. So for example I could search for email if I want to send off an email notification. And lets say I choose Gmail.

[Video description begins] He types email in the search field and clicks Gmail icon in the search results. A new window with actions related to Gmail pops up. [Video description ends]

And then what do you want to do in Gmail? Well what I want to do is send an email message. And from here what I would have to specify are the details related to working with Gmail. If it's the first time I've ever done this, I'm going to have to sign into my Gmail account. Because I've already done that I can specify who I want to send the message to. So a list of email addresses, and I can also add other additional items such as the subject and body here of the message.

[Video description begins] He clicks the action Send email and a new window pops up. It is titled Send email and has fields such as To, Body, and Subject. He checks the elements he wants in his email. [Video description ends]

So maybe in the body, what I want to do is add, let's say, the specific type of event and if I scroll over maybe for the subject, I want to list the subject of the event. And again up here, I can specify some email addresses. So I'm going to go ahead and do that. Email addresses should receive this notification and then I'll click the save button.

[Video description begins] He clicks the Body field and a panel pops up in the right side. It has 2 tabs- Dynamic content and Expression. There is a Search field on the top and various events listed below. Some of them are Event Time, Event Type, and ID. He clicks all the events he wants. [Video description ends]

[Video description begins] He types an email address in the To field. [Video description ends]

After that's done, if I were to go for example to a virtual machine and open up its properties blade and make a change to it such as let's say go to sizing and just choose a different size and click on resize.

[Video description begins] He goes back to the Virtual machines page and clicks Size in the Settings group in the navigation pane. [Video description ends]

I'm writing to that virtual machine, and so our Logic app should capture that event.

[Video description begins] He clicks 81s in the VM SIZE column. A window with the text- Resizing virtual machine- pops up at the top of the machine. [Video description ends]

And so if I go back, let's say to all resources, the view filter for logic, and there's our Logic app. Under the overview part of that if I scroll down I can see for example the status is succeeded down under the run history for our current configuration.


SQL Overview
  - Structured Query Language, or SQL, is the language that's used to access relational database objects and their data. So with a SQL-compliant type of database system, data tables are related via common fields. This is called normalization, and it's a technique that's used to reduce the amount of repeated data. We'll see that in a moment when we see an example of how we might link tables together.

SQL objects include the server that hosts one or more databases. Within a database, we can have one or more tables that actually store the data. Within the table, we have it broken down by fields or columns. So, for example, we might have a table called Customers, and one of the fields might be Customer ID. When we actually populate a table with data, we end up with a record otherwise called a row.

In our example with the Customers table, the record or row would include everything about a customer. So a customer ID, the first and last name, mailing information, and so on. Databases can also contain stored procedures, essentially which are scripts that can be run against items within the database.

We can also create views within a SQL-compliant database that can bring together columns from different tables so we can view it all in one place. And, of course, we can construct a multitude of different types of queries, essentially asking questions about the data stored in tables, such as show me all customers that have spent more than $10,000 in the last quarter.

[Video description begins] Screen title: SQL Table Relationship. [Video description ends]

Pictured on the screen, we've got two tables, and this is used to demonstrate the relationship between tables.

[Video description begins] Two tables are displayed on the screen. The first table is titled Customers table. It has the following three columns: CustID, Lname, and Fname. It contains two rows of data for customer IDs 001 and 002, respectively. The second table is titled Purchases table. It has the following three columns: CustID, Date, and Amount. It has two rows of data for customer ID 001. [Video description ends]

At the top, we've got a Customers table, where we have three columns: Customer ID, Lname for last name, and Fname for first name. Then, we have a second table called Purchases table. It's got three columns, but notice what it has in common with the Customers table, the Customer ID. So Customer ID 001 exists only once in the Customers table.

However, that customer, hopefully, will have more than one purchase with us, and so we can expect to have repeating entries for that Customer ID in the Purchases table. But we don't want to repeat the last name and the first name and everything else about a customer. All we need is one unique item, in this case, the Customer ID to be repeated to link all the purchases in the Purchases table to the customer in the Customers table.

Common SQL-compliant database products would include Microsoft SQL Server, MySQL, Oracle Database, and Sybase to name just a few. In other demonstrations, we're going to take a look at how we would deploy Microsoft Azure SQL Database in the cloud, which is a managed service where we don't have to worry about the underlying virtual machine deployment and the SQL software; it's already built in.


Azure SQL Database
  - One characteristic of cloud computing is rapid provisioning of resources and rapid elasticity, and that's definitely true with Microsoft Azure SQL Database. With SQL Database, we're talking about database as a service, called DBaaS, which is also platform as a service in the cloud.
  - It's a managed service, and that's where the rapid elasticity comes in because we don't have to worry about deploying virtual machines and then installing the Microsoft SQL Server software. All of that is taken care of for us when we deploy Azure SQL Database. So, it's very quick to get up and running. We can also bring our own license. BYOL, bring your own license, will let you reuse any existing SQL Server additional licenses that you want to reuse in the cloud when you deploy Azure SQL Database.

You also have the option of migrating your on-premises SQL data into Azure, so you can reuse your data instead of having to recreate it in the cloud. Azure SQL Database supports scaling in the form of horizontal scaling. This means scaling out, by adding database replicas and also database sharding, which allows us to have more information split up horizontally. What this really means is taking large datasets and breaking them into smaller pieces to improve performance, that's where sharding comes from.

But also, Azure SQL Database allows us to scale vertically, increasing or decreasing the underlying horsepower for each SQL Server instance. And we can do that by configuring virtual machine instance sizing. We can manage Azure SQL Database using the GUI, through the Azure portal, or through the Azure CLI. For example, we could use the az sql db create command to create a database. The equivalent in PowerShell would be New-AzSqlDatabase.

And if you're using ARM templates to deploy and manage Azure resources, you would be looking at a resource type of Microsoft.Sql/Servers. With Azure SQL Database, there is a specific database server firewall enabled, and that's on by default for SQL. So if you want to make a connection into Azure SQL Database from externally, you are going to have make sure you create a firewall rule to allow inbound port 1433 traffic.

Port 1433 is what's used by SQL Server by default. There is even an option where you can add your client IP. So when you are using the portal and you are viewing the firewall information for this, for SQL Database, then what you'll notice is that it'll show your current client IP address that you are connected from, your public IP address if you are behind a NAT router.

And so you can conveniently simply add that as the IP you want to allow through the firewall. And then I would allow you, for example, to use tools like SQL Server Management Studio on-premises to reach into the Azure cloud to your SQL Database instance to manage it.

[Video description begins] Screen title: Azure SQL Database Details. [Video description ends]

When you deploy Azure SQL Database, whether it's through the GUI or through command line tools, there are a number of things you have to take into account, one of which is whether you want to deploy a new SQL Server instance or use an existing one that you might have already deployed. SQL Server instances have the DNS domain suffix of .database.windows.net by default.

You need to specify a unique server and a database name when you are deploying Azure SQL. You have to determine which location, or Azure region, into which you want to deploy Azure SQL Database. From a performance standpoint, you also have an option of selecting database transaction units, or DTUs.

This is a culmination of factors that control the performance when it comes to reading and writing to and from databases. It includes things like the amount of virtual CPU, the amount of memory, and how fast disk I/O is.

The last consideration is that if you're deploying Azure SQL Database for testing purposes or any other temporary reason, make sure that you remove any unused databases and server instances as soon as you are finished. You don't want to leave these things running in the background because you are charged for all of the time that it's left running. So make sure to delete it when you are finished with it.


Azure SQL Database GUI Deployment
  - Azure SQL database is a managed service, and in the cloud, what this really means is that we have an easy way to quickly provision something, in this case, an Azure SQL database, without worrying about the underlying complexities, like virtual machines, and the operating systems, and installing the database software, in this case, Microsoft SQL Server.

[Video description begins] A Microsoft Azure webpage is displayed on the screen. It has a menu bar with a search bar and the following options: Filter, Notifications, Settings, etc. A navigation pane is also present with the following options: Create a resource, Home, Dashboard, All services, and Favorites. The main body of the page has a section titled Azure services. Some of the options here are: Virtual machines, Storage accounts, App Services, etc. [Video description ends]

So here in the portal, let's see how this works by starting with clicking on Create a resource in the upper left.

[Video description begins] He clicks on Create a resource from the navigation pane. A screen titled New appears. It has a search bar and a column titled Azure Marketplace. Some of the items here are: Get started, Recently created, Compute, Networking, Databases, etc. A column titled Featured is also present on this screen. Some of the items here are: Azure SQL Managed Instance, SQL Database, SQL Data Warehouse, etc. [Video description ends]

And in the Databases category, on the right, I will then choose SQL database.

[Video description begins] From the Azure Marketplace column, he selects Databases. From the Featured column, he selects SQL Database. A page titled Create SQL Database appears. It has four tabs: Basics, Additional settings, Tags, and Review +Create. The Basics tab is currently open. It has drop-down menus for Subscription and Resource Group. The default value for Subscription is Pay-As-You-Go. The default value for Resource Group is cloud-shell-storage-eastus. [Video description ends]

Now the first thing I have to do is tie this to a resource group. I've already got one, so I'm going to put it in that resource group, and I have to give this a Database name.

[Video description begins] He clicks the drop-down menu for Resource Group. A list of options appears. He selects Rg1 from the list. He then scrolls down the page. A section titled Database Details appears. It has an input box for Database name and a drop-down menu for Server. There is a question that reads: Want to use SQL elastic pool? It has two options with radio buttons: Yes and No. No is currently selected. For Compute+storage, there is a link for Configure database. At the bottom, there are two buttons: Review+Create and Next: Additional settings. [Video description ends]

So I'm going to start by calling this sqldb172. Now, this name needs to be checked for uniqueness. And once it is okay, and it's been typed in correctly, and there are no invalid characters, we'll get this little green check mark over on the right.

[Video description begins] In the input box for Database name, he types sqldb172. [Video description ends]

Now, down below, I can either tie this to an existing SQL server instance hosted in Azure or I can click Create new, which I'm going to do here.

[Video description begins] There is a link titled Create new below the drop-down menu for Server. He clicks the link. A screen titled New server slides onto the screen. It has input boxes for Server name, Server admin login, Password, and Confirm password. A drop-down menu for Location is also present. The default location is Canada East. Below it, there is a check box for Allow Azure services to access server, which is currently checked. At the bottom there is a Select button. [Video description ends]

And I'm going to call this sqlsvr, for SQL Server, 172. Again, it has to wait for the name to be checked, and it looks good. Then I'm going to specify some server admin login info, so user name, and I will confirm the password.

[Video description begins] In the input box for Server name, he types sqlsvr172. [Video description ends]

[Video description begins] In the input box for Server admin login, he types cirving. He types the password and confirms the password. [Video description ends]

And after that, I'm going to go ahead and click on Select.

[Video description begins] He clicks the Select button. The New Server screen disappears. The value for Server is (new)sqlsvr172 (Canada East). [Video description ends]

So we're creating a new SQL server instance, which is good. I'm just going to scroll down here, I'm going to leave it on the default Compute and storage configuration.

[Video description begins] The value for Compute+storage is Standard S0 10DTUs, 250 GB. [Video description ends]

So 10 DTUs, that's database transaction units, and 250 gigabytes. Although we could click on Configure database and depending on our workload, we could choose the amount of data that we want to be able to accommodate and the database transaction units using these two sliders. So it's always dependent upon your specific workload.

[Video description begins] He clicks the Configure database link. A page titled Configure appears. It has three options: Basic, Standard, and Premium. Basic is currently selected. It has two sliders for DTUs and Data max size. The current DTU is 0 and Data max size is 250 GB. At the bottom, there is an Apply button. He clicks it and the screen shifts to the previous page. [Video description ends]

In this case, I'm going to click Next: Additional settings.

[Video description begins] He clicks the Next: Additional settings button. The screen shifts to the next tab: Additional settings. It has three options for Use existing data: None, Backup, and Sample. None is currently selected. For Collation, there is an input box with the following default value: SQL_Latin1_General_CP1_ CI_AS. At the bottom, there are three buttons: Review + Create, Previous, and Next: Tags. [Video description ends]

Then, I can determine whether I want to have a blank database or use some kind of existing data from a sample data set or a backup. I'm going to leave it blank by leaving it on None. Then I'll click Next.

[Video description begins] He clicks the Next: Tags button. The screen shifts to the next tab, Tags. It has drop-down menus for Name, Value, and Resource. The Resource is Database. At the bottom, there are three buttons: Review + Create, Previous, and Next: Review + Create. [Video description ends]

I can tag this, perhaps to tie it to a project or department, but I'm going to leave that as it is. And finally, on the Review page, I can see the estimated cost per month.

[Video description begins] He click the Next: Review + Create button. The screen shifts to the next tab, Review + Create . It contains Product Details, Terms, Basics, etc. At the bottom, there are two buttons: Create and Previous. [Video description ends]

So we wana be careful with this. This is one of those types of resources in Azure you wanna make sure you shut down or even delete the moment you no longer need it, so you don't incur charges.

[Video description begins] He highlights the estimated cost per month, which is 16.50 USD, listed under Product Details. [Video description ends]

So I'm going to go ahead and click Create.

[Video description begins] He clicks the Create button. An overview page appears. It reads: Your deployment is complete. It has a button labelled Go to resource. It has a navigation pane with the following options: Overview, Inputs, Outputs, and Template. The Overview page is currently open. There is a table on this page. It has following columns: Resource, Type, Status, and, Operation Details. The table has three rows of data. [Video description ends]

And after a moment, we have a message that says our deployment is complete. See it's created a firewall rule here to allow inbound port 1433 traffic to SQL. Then we've got the database and the server.

[Video description begins] The presenter points to the data in the table. He then closes the Overview page and shifts to the home screen of Microsoft Azure. [Video description ends]

Of course, we're going to see all those items here if we go to the All resources view and start to filter the view.

[Video description begins] From the navigation pane, he clicks on All resources present under Favorites. A page titled All resources appears. It has the following buttons on the top: Add, Edit columns, Refresh, etc. Below the buttons, there is an input box for name and drop-down menus for resource groups, types, location, tags, and grouping. Below these, there is a table with the following columns: Name, Type, Resource Group, Location, Subscription, and Tags. A few rows of data are present in this table. [Video description ends]

So if I just type in sql, here we can see our SQL server deployed in the cloud.

[Video description begins] He types sql in the input box for Name. Two rows of data can now be seen in the table. [Video description ends]

But we didn't have to worry about all the complexities that would normally be involved with that if we had deployed a SQL server on premises ourselves. So let's click on the SQL server here in Azure to pop up its Properties blade.

[Video description begins] He clicks on sqlsvr172 present in the table. A screen titled sqlsvr172 appears. It has a navigation pane. The main body contains details about the server. At the bottom, there are two tabs: Notifications and Features. The Features tab is currently selected. It has four tabs: All, Security, Performance, and Recovery. [Video description ends]

And from within here, for example, if I go to the SQL databases view, I can see it is hosting one of our SQL databases, sqldb172, which currently has a status of Online.

[Video description begins] From the navigation pane, he selects SQL databases. A page titled sqlsvr172-SQL databases appears. It has a table with the following three columns: Database, Status, and Pricing Tier. It has one row of data. The Database is sqldb172, Status is Online, and Pricing Tier is Standard S0: 10DTUs. [Video description ends]

And I'll just close out of this.

[Video description begins] He closes the current screen. [Video description ends]

If we go into our SQL database instance, so I'll click on it to pull up its Properties blade, then we have options we can configure, such as Geo-Replication, if we want it replicated to other locations in different Azure regions.

[Video description begins] On the All resources page, from the list of resources present in the table, he clicks sqldb172(sqlsvr172/sqldb172). A page titled sqldb172(sqlsvr172/sqldb172) opens. It has a navigation pane and the following buttons: Copy, Restore, Export, Set server firewall, etc. A list of information about the server is also displayed here. [Video description ends]

[Video description begins] He selects Geo-Replication under Settings from the navigation pane. A world map is displayed on the screen. [Video description ends]

And as we go further down, we'll see that we have a number of options related to things like security. So we've got some Advanced Data Security options available for the database, so vulnerability assessments, also, Dynamic Data Masking to mask some kind of important information, such as the entering of credit card numbers, and so on. And this is configured by configuring what are called masking rules.
And if I go back to the Overview here for our database, I can see the SQL server name. This is what you need if you want to make a connection to this, for example, from on-premises. Now, at the same time, even from here within the database Properties blade, I could click the Set server firewall button, and, I can see my current Client IP address as seen on the Internet.
And so from here, we have the option of making sure that we add a rule that could, for example, contain that IP address or other address ranges that we want to allow access from. Notice we've got an Add client IP button at the top that fills all that stuff in for me to allow connectivity.
So I'm going to go ahead and save that firewall rule because the machine I'm sitting at right now that does have this public IP address I do want to allow in through the firewall for SQL purposes.
